Title: Flexibility and Ambiguity in Chinese
Date: 2011-12-30 16:58
Slug: flexibility-and-ambiguity-in-chinese

I was surprised to find myself having a new appreciation of Chinese (the
language, not the people) on this trip. I've never been a good student
of Chinese; my last formal course in it was in middle school, and that I
almost failed. I can understand Chinese fine, but I can't write it to
save my life. Understandably, I tend to shy away from Chinese literature
even though I read it without problems. I was therefore surprised to
find myself thinking about two aspects of the language I had not
considered before.

The first thought is on how words are constructed. You might have heard
that Chinese doesn't have an alphabet, instead using radicals in some
combinatorial fashion. It is strange to think of letters and words in
Chinese. Not knowing how linguists classify the language (that is,
IANAL: I Am Not A Linguist), Chinese seems to jump straight from pen
strokes to [morphemes](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Morpheme). Each
radical (usually) has its own meaning, and often may be a "word" by
itself. Word is in quotes because, while it is the small free-standing
unit, it is often not sufficient to refer to objects. For example,
"lions" may be written as <span lang="zh-TW">獅</span> by itself, but if
mentioned in isolation <span lang="zh-TW">獅子</span> is more often
used. In this sense Chinese phrases look more like idioms, except there
are also other [Chinese idioms](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chengyu)
with less transparent meanings. Furthermore, each individual word may be
used in multiple phrases, which gives that word by itself some
flexibility in meaning.

What most textbooks don't mention, however, is how new words (in the
combination-of-radicals sense) are often created. There is a common, but
not universal, pattern in Chinese words, where one portion of the word
gives the pronunciation and another portion gives the semantic
association. These portions, especially those for semantics, are often
radicals, but they can often be entire words. The word for lion, for
example - <span lang="zh-TW">獅</span> - contains the word for master -
<span lang="zh-TW">師</span>. Indeed, the two words are homophones of
each other, and the remaining radical - <span lang="zh-TW">犭</span> -
is often used in words related to animals. This compositional nesting is
similar to the prefix and suffix system in English, which allows the
creation of words like anti-dis-establish-ment-arian-ism. I suppose one
could call it an infix system - the prime English example being
[abso-fucking-lutely](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Expletive_infixation) -
except that it's more specific than that. This allows authors to
transcribe colloquial, spoken Chinese, which uses words and sounds which
did not exist. One example of this is a Cantonese word for stuff - <span
lang="zh-TW">嘢</span> - which uses the traditional word <span
lang="zh-TW">野</span> plus the radical for mouth, semantically meaning
that it's mostly a spoken word. The expressive power of this system has
escaped me until now.

The second source of appreciation of Chinese comes from the ambiguous
meaning of single words. The inspiration for this came from a
[restaurant in the Hong Kong
Sheraton](http://www.starwoodhotels.com/sheraton/property/dining/attraction_detail.html?propertyID=482&attractionId=18934),
called <span id="result_box" class="short_text"
lang="zh-TW">雲海</span>. This directly translates to "sea of clouds",
which is decently poetic, but not succinct enough to be a restaurant
name. Then there's the matter of connotations. The word <span
id="result_box" class="short_text" lang="zh-TW">雲</span>, or cloud, can
also be used to mean a large amount and in high density, usually as
referring to people (<span lang="zh-TW">雲雲人海</span>). Similarly for
sea, <span lang="zh-TW">海</span>, which also connotes an unsurpassed
depth and vastness. For two weeks, the question of how to properly
translate this name popped into my head whenever I was bored. My best
attempt, although its still missing some of the connotations, is
"rolling clouds". Of course, it's also the case that "rolling" here
cannot be directly translated back to Chinese. There's an art to
translating more abstract concepts; it reminds me of the [various
translations of
Jabberwocky](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jabberwocky#Translations),
whose meaning is not so much written than connoted. For Chinese, I
think, there's a power which comes from the ambiguity and flexible of
each word, giving every phrase a deeper connotation than otherwise
exists.

