Title: Labels and Folders
Date: 2009-05-08 05:00
Slug: labels-and-folders

In the last few years, the words "label" and "tag" have gotten a whole
new meaning on social networks. del.icio.us, Gmail, flickr... you name
it, you can probably tag it. Aside from the definite usefulness and
convenience, tags are interesting to me because they are an example of
an idea which broke the mold.

Try if you can (if you use <span
style="text-decoration:line-through;">Hotmail</span> Windows Live Mail,
it shouldn't be too hard) to remember what email was like without labels
and tags (which are the same thing). We used these things called
*folders*, and each email (oh yeah, we didn't have conversations,
either) could only be in old folder at any time. The terminology is not
surprising, because we borrowed that from how people organize real world
letters on their *desktop* (I hope you're making the connection now). If
you had a physical letter, then it could only go in one folder - unless
you make copies, but then the copies don't reflect each other. If you
highlighted one letter or made annotations, the other copy in another
folder won't change to reflect that. Because this was the only way of
treating communication, it was the model used for the first
implementations of email.

Now, what I just said wasn't quite true. There are physical ways of
giving an object several categories at once. They're what we call
post-its. You can put different colored post-its in a book to note
where, say, the author talks about the life of that time period versus
the [symbolism of
socks](http://www.mugglenet.com/books/oddities_socks.shtml). If they
happen to be on the same page, no problem - you can tell the two apart
because they're different colored. The only problem was that you
couldn't tag a page with too many things - there's only so much page
border for the post-its to stick out (not to mention that they only sell
post-its in so many colors, although this can be mitigated by writing
the theme on the post-it - hey, labels!).

When you think about it, tags are the logical extension of that. As
mentioned, there is no limit to how many colors/labels you can have.
This is only restricted by your ability to create strings (er, computer
strings, that is, a series of characters). The adhesive on the post-it
will also never die, and you can put as many labels on one thing as you
want.

The digital tag can be thought of as a superset of folders. If you only
put one tag on each object, then they act in the same way as folders.
You can even put slashes (/) in the tags to simulate nested folders. And
why not? Tags are more powerful than folders, and can keep the same
feature (that is, it's backwards compatible). It seems to me that
eventually the tag system will be moved offline to the desktop as well
(if cloud computing doesn't completely eliminate the desktop market).
I'm sure there are difficulties (the datastructures in the OS would have
to be completely reorganized, for example), but I think the final result
would be worth it.

On a side note: shortcuts on Windows, or links on Linux, allow sort of
the same funcationality. One difference is that (for shortcuts and soft
links) what is stored is not actually the file, but directions on how to
find the file. It's like looking in a folder for one thing, then having
something there telling you to look in another folder. Linux does offer
hard links, which puts the actual file there (I'm dumbing this down; if
you know better, good for you), but that's all just technical talk.

I really admire the person who thought to bring tags to the computer
(according to
[Wikipedia](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tag_%28metadata%29#History_and_context),
it was the del.icio.us folks. Kudos), because they're seeing through the
limitations of the current system and doing something better (although
it turns out not to be "new" in this case). In my mind I associate it
with Newton and Leibniz seeing through functions and discovering
calculus, or Einstein cutting through the [luminiferous
ether](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Luminiferous_aether) to arrive at
relativity. Of course, tags are not quite as history making as those
events, but there is something similar in the minds behind all of these
creations.**  
**

I tried to think of more instances where people have taken ordinary
concepts, applied it to computers, then created a more powerful and more
general version of it, but I didn't come up with anything (except some
weak ones, like bookmarks). Can you find any examples?

"bookmarks" (more like book darts now)

