Title: The Data Experience
Date: 2009-05-13 05:00
Slug: the-data-experience

I've been thinking a lot about the task of rapidly conveying vast
amounts of information in a short period of time recently. I'm not sure
why that has been on my mind. I'm calling it the *data experience*,
because (perhaps with the thing on synesthesia and all) I feel that it
is more than just data *visualization*, but it involves the other senses
as well.

Experiencing data, if done properly, can give the sensation of more than
just the 3D world we live in. For example, [stress analysis
simulations](http://images.google.com/images?q=stress+analysis) put
areas of high stress in red, and areas of low stress in blue - for a 3D
object. The color actually gives the model a fourth dimension. Of
course, it's not the entire 4D object - in the case of stress analysis
there is no such thing - but it is a mapping from 3-space to 1-space.
Just as a 3D surface can be represented on a 2D graph with color (a heat
map; the two representations [can be
combined](http://www.originlab.com/www/resources/graph_gallery/images_galleries/weisman_bruce_surface500px.gif)),
a 3D model with color can express a 4D surface. Although less common,
other orthogonal features of graphs can be used to express other
information, taking the visualization into even higher dimensions. An
animated heat map (for example, a stress analysis which shows the change
as the stress is applied then relieved) is convey 5D data. I can imagine
other things - for example, perhaps the thickness of the mesh outline -
which can be used to show even more information at once.

On the other hand, sometimes the data can just be in 3D, but the user
experiences higher dimensions. One of the authors of *The Mathematical
Experience* talks about a 4D intuition. A project at Brown University
allows people to manipulate a tesseract (also known as a hypercube - a
4D structure where all edges are the same length and are orthogonal to
every edge it shares a vertice with). By using the controls to rotate
the virtual tesseract in different ways, [the author suddenly could feel
and reason about the
tesseract](http://www.fortunecity.com/emachines/e11/86/mathex8.html),
just as normal people can mentally rotate a cube. I find the possibility
of lesser dimensional beings able to have an intuition about higher
dimensional objects fascinating.

Another use of data visualization is not so much about the data, but
about the visualizer's partition and organization of the world. Randall
Munroe, for example, [does](http://xkcd.com/418/)
[this](http://xkcd.com/476/) [rather](http://xkcd.com/388/)
[often](http://xkcd.com/435/), as does
[Indexed](http://thisisindexed.com/).

I don't have much more to say, but I would like to share some cool data
experiences:

-   [Did You Know](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jpEnFwiqdx8) - a video
    with surprising statistics. Notice how the background images are
    made to convey meaning as well, although this is now very common
    with newspaper polls and such.
-   [AlloSphere](http://www.ted.com/talks/view/id/516) - an enclosed
    sphere where sound and images can be used to help scientists explore
    connections.
-   [TwitterVision](http://www.twittervision.com/) - a simple but
    elegant way to show not only what people are doing, but where they
    are doing it.
-   [Ball
    Droppings](http://www.chromeexperiments.com/detail/balldroppings/) -
    a Google experiment with interactive AJAX. Not exactly data
    visualization, but it does link the different senses.

Finally, a recent example in my life. In psychology we were talking
about the [implicit association test
(IAT)](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Implicit_Association_Test). Usually
this is done on a computer, so the response time can be measured to
millesecond precision. That could not be demonstrated easily in class
though, and so the professor did a cool analog. Instead of pressing a
button, we had to slap one of our thighs to indicate where category an
object belongs. The point is not to get it right - obviously there is no
feedback between our legs and the computer - but to make the
disassociated concepts apparent. Since people are slower with harder
associations, but different people are slower by different amounts, what
actually happens is with harder associations it would take the the class
longer as a whole to return to silence. A simple, but very effective,
way of showing how the IAT works, and a great example of why I call it
the data *experience*.

