Title: Primal Fear
Date: 2009-02-16 06:00
Slug: primal-fear

Last week's question: What would a transportation system look like if
the ground is frictionless?

I have several ideas. There are several transportation systems already
in place for traversing a frictionless medium, although not on the
ground. Hot air ballons don't rely on ground friction, nor do gliders
and blimps. Gladers move by wind, which will work equally well on the
ground ([land sailing](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Land_sailing)).
Blimps and planes, on the other hand, push air away from it for
propulsion. Propellers and get engines would therefore to do the same on
the ground.

Other ideas I had involve some initial energy. If the distance to be
traversed is not too great, then air resistance is negligible. I can
imagine nets being spread around an area, and people would just push off
to be caught in a net at their destination. Setting up the net initially
would probably require a tether, like how astronauts do space walks -
which, by the way, is truly a frictionless environment.

On a more science fiction note, it may be possible to do something with
eletro-magnets. It will basically be the principle in [maglev
trains](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Maglev_%28transport%29#Electrodynamic_suspension).
I can imagine some sort of remote, a magnetic suit, and a magnetized
floor. Using the remote will activiate electro-magnets, which will push
and pull you in one direction, or alternately slow and stop you.

Considering I just came back from broomball, some of these things sound
really exciting to try out.

This week's question: Humans are often fearful of abstract ideas. Job
interviews, asking someone out... these things have no immediate
physical danger to us. So the question is, do animals have similar kinds
of fears, and if so, from what?

