Title: BMI on Craigslist
Date: 2010-06-16 03:33
Slug: bmi-on-craigslist

There was a post, w4m, on Craigslist. In it, the author listed that she
was 170lbs (I'm not sure if she posted her height), and was looking for
someone who's single, under 30, and has no kids.

As tends to happen on any anonymous internet board, someone replied that
she was picky. Someone else posted that the requires were not particular
at all (which I agree with). Then *two* other people chimed in to say
that 170 is "pretty big" unless "you must be like 7'8?", and that 1"70
is large unless you are REALLY tall".

I was curious, so I looked up the [Body Mass
Index](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Body_mass_index) (BMI), which has
the following form:

BMI = (weight \* C) / height\^2

where C is a constant adjusting for the units.

A [BMI in the normal range
means](http://apps.who.int/bmi/index.jsp?introPage=intro_3.html) it is
between 18.5 and 25, with 22 being the average. This gives a height
range of [69.14,80.37] inches, with an average of 73.70 inches. The
[average height for American
females](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Human_height#Average_height_around_the_world)
above twenty is 64 inches, which results in a BMI of 29.18, firmly in
the overweight category and bordering on obese. There is a 3.8% chance
of her being within the normal range, as [96.2% of American
females](http://www.allcountries.org/uscensus/230_cumulative_percent_distribution_of_population_by.html)
are shorter than 5'9.

So, while the Craigslist posters were harsh, they were also,
unfortunately, correct.

On a different note, the section of the US female population [least
likely to be
overweight](http://www.allcountries.org/uscensus/231_percent_of_u_s_adults_who.html)
is (sterotypically) the Asian/Pacific-Islander (25.2% overweight/obese).
The next least likely (surprisingly) are *those with a graduate degree*
(29.2%). Interesting.

