Title: Time for Dinner!
Date: 2007-12-08 19:32
Slug: time-for-dinner

A question for you to ponder: if the dining halls are open for dinner
from 5 to 7:30 pm, when is the best time to go to avoid the crowd?

The first answer might have something to do with when people get hungry,
and you would go through when you actually have dinner, if your dinner
time represents a majority of people's. Since not a lot of people eat
dinner at 5, most eating 6:30 or later, before 6 is probably a good
answer.

Which is true, and I congratulate you on your reasoning. But then I
don't always feel like eating early either, and it's pretty annoying if
you get hungry again later at night.

It turns out that when the dining hall gets crowded may not be entirely
determined by when people get hungry, but also by when people <span
style="font-style:italic;">think</span> they'll go get food. If you
accept the solution that people like to eat with their friends (which is
mostly true), then there's also the problem of how people decide when to
go and get food as a group. Think about it. If you're meeting someone,
are you more likely to say "I'll meet you at six", "I'll meet you at six
thirty", or "I'll meet you at six thirty seven"?

The point is that when people say they'll do something together, the
time they choose then to be short, and some how more memorable. The
o'clock on the dot is easiest (and shortest) to remember, then the half
hours, the quarter hours, and maybe the five-minutes. So a good time to
get food would be a short time <span
style="font-style:italic;">before</span> any of the easy to remember
times, say 6:25 or 6:40.

If only I had the same sense of understanding of buying practices in the
stock market.

