Title: Academic Typecasting
Date: 2009-03-04 06:00
Slug: academic-typecasting

We often hear stories about actors who don't want to be typecasted.
Although this is a term that's also [thrown
around](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Type_conversion) in computer
science, what actors usually mean is that they are seen too often in
characters with similar personalities, and are therefore unable to get
other kinds of roles. Jim Carrey, I think, is a great example; he tends
to appear in slapstick-like comedies, although he is also capable of
dramatic acting (Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind; I love that
movie).

So I was thinking about grad school the other day, and how I will spent
a chunk of my life solving one small problem. As an [aspiring
renaissance
man](http://justinnhli.com/posts/2008/12/homo-universalis.html), I am
a little apprehensive of the idea, but I understand that it's a
necessary path to being an expert on anything. What I do want to avoid
though is being typecast as someone who only does computer science.

The thing is, once I get a PhD (5 years from now) and become a professor
(who knows how long), I still want to have discussions about things far
from computer science. One good thing about doing AI is that the field
is inherently inter-disciplinary. At the very least you have to know
some psychology, and then maybe some math. There will be senimars on
education, so that's good, and it's always easy to branch into
philosophy. But that's about it. The people I interact with daily, then,
will be defined by these fields - just as I will be. What if I want to
talk about social issues? Or perhaps explore the graphic design of some
house? Global warming? While I'm sure other people will have some
interest in things like this, I don't see any heavily promoted open
forum to talk about whatever you want, with whoever's interested.

I can read (although I haven't done any leisure reading for the past
month; I'm just too busy), but that's a very passive way of learning. I
want to discuss ideas with people, to express my own and expect
rebuttals and disagreements.

I'm not changing my mind about grad school; it's just a concern I have
about my general well-being.

I guess my point is: please keep commenting on my blog.

