Title: Dinner Table Conversations
Date: 2008-02-15 03:17
Slug: dinner-table-conversations

I had two philosophically deep conversations at two recent meals. Only
one was at dinner, despite the title of the post, but both contained
profound ideas.

The lunch was between someone I had met last year at another meal, and
during the latter stages of the conversation one of his friends joined
us. I forgot how the conversation started, but the relevant part started
with me describing to him what the [technological
singularity](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Technological_singularity)
was. I asked him what he thought the future would be like, and him being
a fairly religious person, he said that the far future, at the time of
the apocalypse, the world will be very different. His idea of it was not
the usual everybody dies and goes to heaven though. He had envisioned it
as a transformation of the physical world; that is, the earth will still
be here, but it will be somehow different. Heaven on earth, I think, is
the basic idea. From this, he said he therefore believes that technology
will be around for a very long time.

His friend then arrived, and asked a few questions clarifying her
understanding of his religion (alright, he's Mormon). My friend
explained that he believed humans are literal spirit children of God,
and would therefore "grow up" to be like God, with all His powers,
including creation. The way I envision it is there's a whole God
species, of which we are all spiritual parts.

It occurred to me then, although I didn't say it at the time, that our
theories are actually surprisingly compatible. Granted, my not believing
in God is a big difference, but I see some of my version of the future
being described in his terminology. That a change will abruptly take
over all of earth - isn't that exactly what the technological
singularity is about? We will not longer be the dominant species, but
will instead "share" the world with the machines and its artificial
intelligence. Arguably, we will be living under a greater intelligence -
that of the machines. And in this way, we have outgrown ourselves and
transformed into something bigger: a planet wide machine consciousness.

This (and therefore I myself as the author) probably seems crazy to many
of you. Well, I won't be the first person on earth to have strange
beliefs.

My friend's friend brought up a good point, however, when I explained
the technological singularity to her. As an economics major, she saw
change as driven by need. What she questioned was that, since the
technological singularity will be in some sense incomprehensible by
humans, whether it would be "needed". And if it's not needed, that it
wouldn't happen at all.

I haven't thought about that before, and I haven't thought about it
enough since to give a good answer.

My dinner conversation was also about religion, as me and one of my
friends exchanged our worldviews. He managed to elicit and generalize my
reasons for being an atheist into broad strokes:

1.  There is no (perceptual) evidence for God.
2.  Believing in God is not useful.

I have had vague thoughts in the direction of the second idea before,
but this is the first time I've realized it is in some sense necessary.
There may not be perceptual evidence of quarks either, or of radiation
or other phenomenon. However, I and a lot of people take it's existence
to be real, because it serves a purpose - quarks explain certain aspects
of physics, and radiation helps with cancer and nuclear weapons.

God is different. I don't think God's existence can be taken as real,
because I don't see any benefits to believing in God. My friend made me
explain what I mean by useful, which I replied by some sort of utility
in helping survive, or otherwise make life better. That could be money,
power, a sixth sense, whatever. While I have never believed in God, and
therefore don't have first hand experience in saying that it's not
useful, this seems to be something which we can test for statistically.
Is it the case that religious people earn more money, or live a happier
life? Nope.

One argument against this is that people who believe in God go to
heaven, while others don't (in the most dichotomized case). Well, yeah,
okay, but you'll have to prove heaven first.

