Title: Lost in Life
Date: 2008-02-20 19:10
Slug: lost-in-life

I'm feeling a little lost right now.

My projects this quarter are going okay, not great, but it's
progressing. But that's not the sense in which I'm getting lost
(although I think it contributes). I'm a little worried about what will
happen in the future.

When I graduated from high school, I was pretty sure what I wanted to
be: a computer science professor, teaching and doing research, most
likely in some field of artificial intelligence. I have stuck to that
dream job for most of the past three years, except for the past week I
began having slight doubts. I'm not sure I'm suited for that profession.

It is not the case that suddenly find myself disliking computers. I
still love to program, still love to hear ideas about how to turn a dumb
piece of silicon into a reasoning, helpful machine. But I realized that
I want to do something more. Not only something more interesting than
aggregating search results, but something different.

In other words, something ground breaking.

And that's when I begin to have doubts. I've talked about this with some
of my friends before. A lot of the great people in the last century were
already great when they were young. Feynman, my ideal of a quirky
genius, was already a genius in high school. One of my friends have
co-written papers in ACM. While I'm here blogging away, not really
helping the community at all.

I sometimes wonder if my smaller projects will be remembered and
glorified in a future biography.

At the same time, I feel like my interests are also drawn somewhere
else. I have an interest in modeling evolution, currently most
prominently in modeling how reciprocal can develop giving the right
environments. I like teaching, computer science or otherwise, and have
recently taken an interest in finding ways of making computers more
accessible to people without a technical background. And then there's
design, which is not one of my fortes but still one of my curiosities.

All that, and I graduate in one and a half years. What am I going to do
with myself?

