Title: Why I Write
Date: 2008-02-09 02:32
Slug: why-i-write

Sometimes I question why I write on this bloody thing, since only about
7 people a day read this. Although, from the angle that 7 strangers
(alright, maybe 4 strangers) is reading this, it's pretty amazing what
the internet can do.

Ahem. Anyway (that sounded like one of my friends), why I write. Since
November last year I've decided that I would write in my personal
journal less often, in favor of writing daily here. I would import
whatever posts sounded interesting back into my journal. Since then,
I've tended to still write in my journal once or twice a week, but
that's compared to the every other day average for the past five years.

I think part of the reason I've decided to do that was that college is
presenting me with a lot of new things, new ideas to contemplate. My
journal, as I've said before, is mostly for personal stuff, and although
I would occasionally write about computer science, that's the limited
extent to which I put academics into it. This blog gives me the freedom
to jot down fancy ideas I have, so I could reference it later. It's
really not so much that I have a separate space for writing, but a
different GUI to look at, so my personal and intellectual thoughts are -
at least visually - separated.

That, and I find writing fun, and would like to be better at it.

This being a public blog though, I've been hoping that more people would
read what I write. A little narcissistic, I know, but I think part of
the reason blogs (as opposed to a private journal) are popular is
because people want to share their thoughts. Sharing, by definition,
needs other people to participate.

In a campaign to make other bloggers feel better about their blogs, I
subscribed to several random blogs, blogs which I thought had a
personality to them. One of them was also in French, because I would
like to get better. This all portrays me as a very shady stalker-ish
person, but I promise that's not the case. Maybe I'll comment and
introduce myself. I guess, when I say the blogs have a "personality",
that's what I mean: they wouldn't mind me commenting, and would be
interested in making friends.

One can hope, right?

