Title: Atlas Shrugged (cont.)
Date: 2010-08-06 02:08
Slug: atlas-shrugged-cont

I had forgotten about these two points last time. Also, Faye has [posted
her
thoughts](http://fayezor.blogspot.com/2010/08/reflections-on-atlas-shrugged.html)
on Atlas Shrugged.

**Post Script 4: Sanction of the Victim**

Although, as Faye suggested, that wealth is most often made collectively
in the world at large, this is not true for special circumstances. In
smaller groups, especially when the groups are not formed through mutual
selection, there are often members who do most of the work and members
who barely work at all. I am, of course, talking about school projects.
If Atlas Shrugged had an effect on me, it is in my wondering whether I
should have been more honest in group evaluations.

**Post Script 5: On the Value of Human Life**

At the end of the novel, the protagonists take over a torture facility
to rescue John Galt. In one scene, Dagny confronts a guard by telling
him that she was sent there by the head of state and making him choose
between letting her in and obeying his boss' order to keep everyone out.
When he couldn't make a decision, Dagny shoots him dead.

This scene, and the following ones, never satisfied me. Although I see
the literary need to rescue Galt (and have no suggestion on how to
otherwise achieve this), killing to achieve this seems entirely
antithetical to the novel. Implied in the killing is that there is no
life without thought and that being alive or dead makes no difference in
that case. While this may be a valid philosophical position, putting it
into action violates more than the value of life: our protagonists are
also imposing their beliefs on others and making that choice of life and
death for them. It is this latter imposure that I cannot stand. My
philosophy leans toward what is said of Voltaire (but actually written
by Evelyn Beatrice Hall): "I disapprove of what you say, but I will
defend to the death your right to say it."

