Title: Restless
Date: 2009-06-12 17:57
Slug: restless

Although I only had one final this week, I had some grading to complete
and a take-home to finish. In reality I didn't have everything done
until last night. And almost immediately, I felt tendrils of doubt
creeping into my mind. What am I to do now?

I am someone who needs things to do to be satisfied. It can be school
work, or being with friends, or sinking into a good book. The first I'm
done with, by definition; the second I don't have that many of; and the
third I have a nagging feeling is not constructive enough. Paul Graham
[says of reading](http://www.paulgraham.com/love.html), "Except for some
books in math and the hard sciences, there's no test of how well you've
read a book, and that's why merely reading books doesn't quite feel like
work. You have to do something with what you've read to feel
productive." That's why I use [book darts](http://www.bookdarts.com/),
to keep track of stories which I find inspiring and sentences of
succinctly expressed great ideas. I write the quotes down afterwards,
and they may eventually find themselves in blog posts - as the ones from
Closing the American Mind
[did](http://justinnhli.com/posts/2009/05/thoughts-on-being-student.html).

I've always thought that the greatest contribution of religion to
personal life is that it gives people a purpose. I believe in creating
that purpose myself instead of having it be prescribed, and so perhaps
it's strange that I don't like free time. But I don't think that's a
fair description of myself; it's not that I don't like free time, but
the promise of more, better things to do in the future makes this period
of relaxation boring. In two weeks I will be in LA, once again
interacting with the smartest kids in the country and the world. In
three months I will be in Ann Arbor, naively eager to contribute to the
compendium of human knowledge. It is in comparison to these sights and
sounds that this period of nothingness seems dull.

I was once asked whether I will miss Northwestern. As a rather
[unemotional
person](http://justinnhli.com/posts/2009/02/rational-people.html), I
replied that I don't think I will. "Missing" is not the right word to
use. I am certainly sad to see friends depart, neither of us knowing
when we'll see each other next. I also know that I have fond memories of
my time at Northwestern, and will sometimes reminiscence over them. But
I believe I have a bright future, with the great opportunities for
happiness (and disappointment as well, I suppose). The past has shaped
who am I; now let me shape the future.

What I'm saying is that I would rather have graduation done with, then
jump on to the next thing in my life, than to waste a week waiting for
things to catch up to my enthusiasm.

I guess I'm an impatient person.

