Title: Generative Protection (aka. Graduate School in Midsight)
Date: 2012-11-08 03:29
Slug: generative-protection-aka-graduate-school-in-midsight

I feel like I should talk about grad school and how my fourth year has
somehow crept up on me, but really what interests me is the idea of
generative protection, so I'll talk about that and use examples from
grad school to illustrate it.

I first came across the idea of generative protection - or more
generally, generativity - while I was working in Web Communications back
at Northwestern, in 2006. We handled the website redesign for
Northwestern Magazine, and one article I had to check was Elizabeth
Blackwell's
[Redemption](http://www.northwestern.edu/magazine/winter2005/feature/redemption.html).
The article was about Dan McAdams, a Northwestern psychology professor
doing research on how people tell their life stories. One trait he
points out is generativity, which is a measure of how much people want
to leave a legacy. At the time, the only thing I noticed was that
generative people also tend to be narcissistic. About a year later, I
came across an article in the New York Times, [This is Your Life (and
How You Tell
It)](https://www.nytimes.com/2007/05/22/health/psychology/22narr.html?pagewanted=all).
That article focused more on telling life stories and how it is healthy,
but one quote about generativity stuck with me: "Often, too, [generative
adults] say they felt singled out from very early in life - protected,
even as others nearby suffered."

That sentence put words to an idea I've had since high school. An
episode from 2004-01-16 in my journal, when someone asked me how I did
in my chemistry exam and it was better than the scores they've heard so
far, I wrote, "I knew, and I kind of felt sorry, like survivor's guilt,
since everyone did so poorly but I was unscathed." This feeling was touched
on in an earlier [blog post about grad
school](http://justinnhli.com/posts/2009/11/challenges.html). A month
later, a friend asked me why I think I'm not good at taking compliments,
and I replied:

> I think my reaction to compliments comes from not being able to return
> the compliment. This happened a lot in high school and early in
> college, when I would get really good grades without really trying.
> Inevitably someone would ask me what I got, and after telling them
> they would say good job or something similar. But I know intuitively
> that they didn't do as well, so I feel guilty about it. Kinda like
> survivor's guilt, I guess. I've gotten better at just saying thankyou
> though.

I used the word "guilt", but the feeling was never explicitly negative.
If I had to explain it, I would say that it's a sort of puzzlement -
about why other people didn't do as well as I did, about why people find
things so difficult while I have barely exerted myself. It was only
recently that the phrase "generative protection" came to mind, but it
conveys how I feel very well. It was as though I am detached from the
situation in some way, so hardships that affect other people only pass
through me.

The idea of generative protection came back to me at the end of last
year, after I worked to pass my prelim that summer. The previous post on
grad school might suggest that this feeling of easy accomplishment would
have completely disappeared by then (and more so now, another year of
the [PhD grind](http://pgbovine.net/PhD-memoir.htm) later); this is true
with research, but not with grad school in general.

In research, even by the first semester, I was feeling the full force of
the [impostor syndrome](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Impostor_syndrome).
So named because people feel like they're merely faking it, grad school
is an environment that pumps out these kinds of people. As a result,
every grad student thinks everyone else is doing better than they are,
and no one feels like they know what they're doing. In a lab with three
senior students, who seem to talk knowledgeably about their research
areas, I was understandably intimidated. The funny thing was, after
knowing them a little better, I learned that they were also intimidated
by me, as I was quiet and always seemed to be working. It took me
another long while before I understood that I was as smart as other
people in the lab, that we were good at different things, and that we
all tend to only notice the times when other people were smarter than us
but not vice versa. This depression and later rebound in confidence
fixed my feeling of generative protection. I now have a healthy, and
hopefully relatively objective, view of my abilities and my own
research.

But being a grad student is more than about research; it is also about
being able to strike that balance between work and everything else.
There are, I think, three reasons why this balance comes easily to me.
The first is that I'm not afraid to take time off. I spent three of the
last four weekends away from Ann Arbor: the first was part of a
week-long bouldering trip to Georgia, while two more weekends were spent
in Kentucky. I do feel slightly ashamed that I'm not working, but not
enough to stop me from going. I am, of course, writing this post when I
could be reading papers. The second reason is that I find other
non-research grad school activities to busy myself with. I am the
secretary for the [computer science graduate students group
(CSEG)](http://cseg.eecs.umich.edu/), so I have a non-passive role
organizing events for the department. This semester I'm also an
[engineering teaching consultant
(ETC)](http://www.engin.umich.edu/teaching/crltengin/gsi_serv/etc), so I
spend time observing and giving suggestions to teaching assistants.
Doing "work" for these roles gives me a break from research without
inflicting too heavy a sense of guilt. The final reason work-life
balance is easy is that, to be honest, work is fun. I enjoy separating
theoretical confounds and laying down theory for my research, and to
some extent am willing to spend "play" time doing so. I've previously
mentioned the spars with my dad about the [work-play
distinction](http://justinnhli.com/posts/2009/03/smile.html); my
relative lack of such distinction greatly reduces how stressful I feel.
Plus, as [Larry
Birnbaum](http://infolab.northwestern.edu/people/larry-birnbaum/) said,
one doesn't have to be brilliant all the time; if one is brilliant ten
minutes a day, that's already pretty good.

In truth, the work-life balance issue isn't what makes me feel
protected. I have yet to talk to a grad student who truly feels that
their work is destroying their non-work life. I wrote the previous
paragraph because I felt like
[humblebragging](http://www.urbandictionary.com/define.php?term=humblebrag),
but also because I promised I would talk about grad school. What makes
me feel protected is that I am still in grad school at all. In the past
year and a half, I know four people who left grad school without their
(PhD) degrees. I only know two of them with any depth, but both of their
reasons for leaving are the same: they are not sure whether grad school
is right for them. Keep in mind that this is after three years into the
program, after what most people consider the horrible second year; they
have both passed their prelims (and will therefore likely get a
Master's), and are capable of conducting independent research. For them,
it wasn't a matter of ability, but a matter of desire. Neither of them
have found a topic they are willing to invest time in, and they are not
sure it's worth the time to continue banging their heads against the
wall to figure it out. At least one of them is not sure whether it's the
research topic (or lack thereof) or the research process that is putting
them off, and feels it's better to try something new. Their stories made
me realize how easily I have taken on the role of a grad student and how
I feel grad school is, if not the right choice, at least not the wrong
choice for me.

The descriptions I have given so far of why I might feel I am protected
have been about events in my life. One could ask what it was that led me
to excel in school and to be so sure that I want to teach at the
university level. The only answers I have for these two questions are
that "I am good at recognizing patterns" (which is something someone
else said of me) and that "I am introspective". These answers do not
provide any insight, at least not at this level, and I am not prepared
to explore them at this time. Another path of questioning, one I am more
interested in, is why I perceive myself as being protected.
Equivalently, one might ask why I don't feel as though I have tried very
hard in my accomplishments. After all, generative protection is a
subjective feeling, not an objective fact; the same event of remaining
in grad school could be interpreted as the result of hard work and
perseverance. I spend a lot of weekends coding or writing papers, and
evenings are often spent sitting at coffee shops exploring the
theoretical foundations of my work. Given that I do invest time in
research (or climbing), why do I still feel shielded from the
difficulties of life - that, to quote from [Atlas
Shrugged](http://justinnhli.com/posts/2010/07/atlas-shrugged.html),
I've "never suffered"?

I don't have a clear answer to that question, but I do have two related
hypotheses. The first is that, once I have accomplished something
difficult, that task seems much easier in hindsight. The closest
approximation to this idea is what education psychologists call *[the
curse of
knowledge](http://www.aps.org/publications/apsnews/200711/backpage.cfm)*.
It describes the phenomenon where experts - people who are good at a
particular task - find it difficult to explain how to perform that task
to novices. The underlying reason for this curse is that expertise
changes the neural pathways in the brain, making what previously
required conscious thought into something that is automatic and
instinctive. For me, the same mechanism may lead to a strong myopic
bias, leading me think that the task was never difficult, despite the
memory of how I struggled to accomplish it in the first place. I had
[tweeted](http://twitter.com/#!/justinnhli/status/114737110761738242)
this idea some months ago: "It turns out that - for someone with a
pretty huge ego - I tend to trivialize my accomplishments."

The second theory is encapsulated by this quote from the climber Adam
Ondra in the film
[Progression](http://www.bigupproductions.com/#/films/Progression/),
when he compared himself to Chris Sharma: "I think I'm basically weak."
Ondra was comparing their ability to do strength-based climbing moves,
in which there might be a legitimate difference in their ability.
Objectively, however, Ondra remains one of the strongest (if not *the*
strongest) climber in the world; his accomplishments alone is strong
evidence that he is not a weak climber. I have come to call this the
weakness mindset: the idea that there is nothing special about our
ability despite being extremely competent. The perception of weakness,
together with my continued survival despite that weakness, leads to the
conclusion that I am protected. A second implication of this belief is
that I must not have worked very hard or trained very long, as otherwise
I would not be weak. This elegantly explains both the feeling of
protection and the feeling that no effort was exerted.

My suspicion is both the hindsight explanation and the weakness mindset
are expressions of something deeper, a get-it-done-at-all-cost mentality
that makes any effort worthwhile. That, however, is the subject of
another post.

Postscript: There are at least two omissions in this essay, which were
realized only in the process of writing (hence, an
[*essay*](http://justinnhli.com/posts/2009/09/writing-about-writing.html)).
First, I realized that there are two ways to define the lack of
suffering: that of not having worked hard, and that of not having
encountered difficult external circumstances. This ambiguity in the
meaning of "suffer" is important, as it is the quote from Atlas Shrugged
that first inspired this subject. Second, I acknowledge that there is no
immediate connection between not exerting oneself and feeling protected.
Their relationship will have to be cleared up at a later date.

