Title: A Narrative of Externalization
Date: 2008-01-29 15:25
Slug: a-narrative-of-externalization

The follow is a response I wrote for my Human Computer Interaction
course. It references three books/papers: [Interaction
Design](http://www.amazon.com/Interaction-Design-Beyond-Human-Computer/dp/0470018666/)
by Sharp, Rogers, and Preece, [The Myth of the Paperless
Office](http://www.amazon.com/Myth-Paperless-Office-Abigail-Sellen/dp/026269283X/)
by Sellen and Harper, and The Atlantic Monthly article [As We May
Think](http://www.theatlantic.com/doc/194507/bush) by Vannevar Bush.

I thought it interesting how the readings for this week seemed to
provide a narrative of not only computer interfaces, but a history of
how humans have been externalizing memory. Starting all the way back
when papyrus was invented in ancient Egypt, these thin pieces of reed
were used to record the daily activities of humans. Of course, even
before that there was writing, mostly carved and painted on rock or
stone. Papyrus and paper (invented by the Chinese) has an obvious
advantage to writing on stone. For one thing, paper is a lot cheaper to
manufacture; there is no heavy manual labor involved, unlike the
quarrying and cutting of stone. Paper is more efficiently stored; a
stack of paper the size of stone tablet would contain many times more
information. Finally, paper is easier to transport, which might as well
have been a side effect of the invention of paper. When stone carving is
still used, who would have thought of moving a giant block of stone (or
not much better, a heavy stone tablet) to another place? Messengers were
used instead, with the associated limit in how much can be transmitted
at once. The lightness of paper, however, allowed much more information
to be transmitted.

Vannevar Bush's paper suggested that in the late 1940s, the human
capacity for production (and to a lesser extent, distribution) of
information is rapidly expanding, while there is no mechanism for
accessing all the information in a easy manner. Arguably, this same
effect has occurred over the several thousand years between the
Egyptians and the modern age. The printing press has made the production
of books, therefore information, much easier and widespread. At the
time, only the rich and clergymen were literate. From the Enlightenment
onwards, the skills of reading and writing slowly disseminated, so that
more people could write and contribute their own knowledge. By the time
of Bush's paper, "information" is no longer simply counted by how many
pages it will take, but by other units such as words on a telegram, or
stacks of microfilm, or reels of video. It is hard to say whether all
this is merely a "side effect" of the industrial age, but the was no
distinct movement to dispose the use of paper. Until the telegram was
invented, there was simply no easier way of communicating than with
paper, and even with telegram there is no cheaper way per word. It would
perhaps not be too big an exaggeration to say that paper was still the
cheapest and easier way of externalizing memory.

As the personal computer began to emerge, however, more of our mental
life could be externalized. Computers are not only capable of storing
information (so we don't have to remember) and transmitting information
(so we don't have to physically meet and talk), they are also capable of
computation - dare I say, so we don't have to think. Before the
technology matured, there was only limited methods of how to externalize
thinking, perhaps also due to how foreign the concept seems at the time
(as it does now to me). For thinking to be externalized, there has to be
methods of instructing the external agent with what to think about. The
development of computer instruction could again be traced back from the
time of Bush's paper. In the 1940s computers were still mostly hardware,
the program to run being an entire circuit board. Punch cards were then
developed, as a unified way of representing the abstract notion of
computation, and finally programming languages were invented. It is
interesting to note that when humans think, we do not necessary have to
physically move; this parallels the development of software
("computation") going from the initially physical circuits, to abstract
bits and bytes as the high level programming languages we are now used
to.

As computers got more powerful, so programs are not only run in batch
but in real time, the interface for the computer had to change as well.
As outlined in chapter 6 of Interaction Design, the need for more
powerful, and I would argue more \_natural\_, ways of interacting with
the computer was met by different "paradigms". The command line was a
text-only interface, oblivious to visual stimuli or other gestures,
while the GUI provided information which humans could scan and absorb at
a much quicker rate. The development of speech, pen/stylus, and even
gesture based input allows people to interact with computers not as
abstract computation machines, but as an appliance or perhaps even
another human being. Computers are being integrated into the everyday
lives of humans.

Also hidden in this narrative of the development of computers is the
different form our external memory have taken; slowly (although Sellen
and Harper of The Myth of the Paperless Office would argue it is /much/
more slowly) our memory have gone from writing on paper to typing on
magnetic disks. Again, the same comparison between stone and paper could
be made between paper and magnetic disks: disks can store more in less
space, although there is no clear price or transportation benefit. As
Sellen and Harper have pointed out in the first few chapters of their
book, it is not the case that paper is inherently bad or backwards and
must be disposed of. Instead, the developments outlined above take
advantage of the power of computers. No piece of paper in the world
could produce writing at the sound of your voice. The medium, either
paper or computer, makes certain interactions easier and others harder.
The computer perhaps cannot totally replace paper, but it can, as shown
in the case study of IMF, be used seamlessly side by side.

Here I would like to make a quick note of how Vannevar Bush, in his
paper 50 years ago, have foreseen a lot of what computers could do.
Different though his methods of implementation may be, he nonetheless
thought of a "memex" as a way to relate large number of written
articles - a forerunner of the internet. It is astounding that he can
envision such a complex system simply by extrapolating for the
technology of his day.

This brings us back to the present, and as Vannevar did 50 years ago, we
cannot help but wonder how computers will develop in the future. The
authors of Interaction Design pointed to mobile and web based
interfaces. While I don't necessarily disagree, I would instead argue
that the bigger theme is for computers to become more natural for
humans. Already there are more device being made with touch screen
capabilities. I believe this is because the keyboard, while useful for
typing, was not made to encompass human activity. Even the key layout
(QWERTY) was not for speed or efficiency (like the Dvorak keyboard was),
but to solve the problem of early typewriters jamming when multiple keys
are pressed in quick succession. The ability to manipulate information
by touch comes much more naturally than typing. To move an image to the
right, simply drag it as you would a piece of paper on your desk.
Similarly, although writing is slightly harder to master than dragging,
it is still commonly used. I would not be surprised if handwriting
recognition is developed to much better levels, and people would compose
on small, mobile "sheets" of writing interfaces. These devices have no
computational power of their own, and thus can be mass produced. The
main advantage is, again, that anything written or drawn on it can be
saved for future reference. I don't think, however, this idea will be
popular until it becomes much cheaper than paper.

The other aspect of computation I expect to develop is the
"intelligence" of the machine. Bush had suggested that the "memex" will
be referenced by relevance to an idea, not by a single word. Although
not a commonly used feature, some search engines can already to that; in
Google appending '\~' in front of a key word will make the engine search
for similar terms. For example searching for "\~cars" returns results
with "automobile" "motor" and "BMW" highlighted. The technology behind
this is no doubt similar to what is used to power Google Sets; perhaps
the associates are even formed that way, by watching what users type in
and the click on. Finally, research in artificial intelligence have also
taken the concept of association to heart, and the product is relational
knowledge databases like Cyc.

I would finally like to propose a system which I myself will find
helpful. While composing this very exposition I have paper with reading
notes taped to the wall in front of me, so I easily refer to it. The
wall offers a giant space for me to annotate and draw lines of
connections. All this is hard to store for future reference, however. I
could imagine a giant touch/stylus screen instead of a wall, where I
would write and diagram, and with the push of a button, have all that be
saved. This is a scheme which not only imitates paper, but in fact
attempts to replace a system of paper, wall, and whiteboard. This trend
of computers representing larger and larger systems is, in my opinion,
the way computers will grow computationally.

