Title: Deserve Victory
Date: 2008-01-11 21:44
Slug: deserve-victory

I thought I will share a personal motto I had for... the past few
months, if not a year:  

> "Deserve Victory"
> </p>

I know that Churchill used this phrase on his
[posters](http://images.google.com/images?hl=en&gbv=2&q=%20deserve%20victory)
for WWII, but that wasn't where I got it from. Instead, it's from the
[Sword of Truth series](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Sword_of_Truth)
by Terry Goodkind. Each book in the series has a wizard's rule, and
"Deserve Victory" is from the 8th book, Naked Empire. I personally
haven't read that book (I stopped at book 6 or so), but a [fan
site](http://terrygoodkind.net/rules.php) gave the explanation as:  

> "Be justified in your convictions. Be completely committed. Earn what
> you want and need rather than waiting for others to give you what you
> desire."
> </p>

I really like the motto, as well as the explanation. "Deserve Victory"
is not telling you that you deserve victory, and that you are not happy
is life's fault. Rather, it is an imperative, telling you to work to
"deserve victory". You could sit in a dark room and watch as life
passes, or you could stand up and take a chance.

The most successful case of applying the motto was that I got my CTY
job. Yes, I haven't told you yet, but I'm telling you now. I had to find
an adviser for my independent study, to satisfy the requirements set
forth by my student visa. I wrote my resume and cover letter after
reading samples online, found references and mailed my transcript, and
prepared and did my interview, all on my own. Having gotten the job,
knowing that I have worked hard for it, I know I deserve it. Of course,
if I didn't, it would be a shame, but at least I could say I tried.

I have, however, yet to work this motto into my social sphere. I've said
I would several times in my journal, but it's less certain how to
proceed. Although, I could be convinced that it only feels more risky,
because the path is clear enough. I just need to pick up my courage.

Go Forth and Deserve Victory.

