Title: Journaling and Blogging
Date: 2007-10-10 19:02
Slug: journaling-and-blogging

Some people may ask (like "frequently asked questions"... no one ever
asks) why I keep a blog as well as a personal journal. They both serve
the same purpose of recording one's life, thoughts, and other events.

I don't know about other people, but for me there is a fairly big
difference between what I write in this blog and what I write in my
journal. The topics of this blog are much more mundane. That doesn't
mean they're not important, but that they are not *personal*. The most
personal thing I will write here is a surface description of an event,
like a GSW session or an NUOC trip. I don't write about feelings or
emotions, at least not the ones that matter.

This blog does however serve a purpose. I wouldn't write about Doodle in
my journal, because it's insignificant to my life as a whole. I won't
talk about micro-blogging, or theremins, or how to use Javascript to
cheat free hosting servers. These all belong here. They form the smaller
details in my life, things that make me happy on a minute to minute
basis. I may forget them soon, but by putting them here I hope other
people will discover something about life that they didn't know before,
and in so spread the joy in finding something new.

In my journal I may keep detailed analysis of people, doubts about my
life, about the future. Those may be pages long, with references to
previous journal entries, filled with juicy details about other people's
lives (, and long lists like this one). These thoughts and feelings are
too personal to share, and so I don't post them up. In fact, I'm sure a
lot of people will be angry at me if I posted my entire journal. There
are too many secrets and internal judgments.

Having said that, I still hope you dear readers will enjoy this blog. If
you find something interesting, leave a comment! I would love to know
what ideas interest other people, to "make that secret connection that's
nothing more than finding out that someone else is wandering through
this world with the same hopes and uncertainties as you." -
[XKCD.com](http://www.xkcd.com/)

