Title: Week of 2007-11-05
Date: 2007-11-12 05:23
Slug: week-of-2007-11-05

This week has not been quite as exciting as the last, with trips to the
Shedd and what not. I did have a midterm for stats, for which I didn't
study too much, and didn't get too bad a grade. My psych midterm I had a
while back turned out okay, too, although slightly less "okay" than my
stats one.

So I guess my most interesting thing for the week was my teleconference
with the clients for our interactive oceanarium project. I've mentioned
dolphins in relation to this project several times, but I never
explained what it is. I thought now would be a good time to talk about a
more, shall we say, exciting part of my life.

Our task for this quarter and the next is to design something which will
allow humans to interact, in some way, with captive dolphins and whales
in an aquarium. The original idea was to have a remote controlled
submarine that the aquarium personnel can control, and perhaps given to
visitors under supervision. That was what we started off with, and we
got to do a lot of research, as well as observe dolphins and beluga
whales.

I'll tell you one thing: I have gone whale spotting before, in Alaska
and Australia, but I have not been too close to a whale. You're on a
boat, after all, and the whale can easily rock the boat by charging it.
And there's probably some international law about approaching whales. So
the closest you ever get is maybe 100 metres, probably more than that.
At an aquarium though, that's different. I got within ten feet of the
beluga whales, and I can tell you it's pretty amazing. The whales
themselves are longer than that distance, and they weight at least five
times more than I do. Belugas are cute though; their skin/blubber looks
really soft. It is, essentially, a giant stuffed toy.

The dolphins (specifically, Pacific white-sided dolphins) are another
story. They are much more athletic than the beluga whales, very quickly
swimming circles around their tank, occasionally breaking the surface
for a breathe then diving down again. I was surprised by how fast they
were; standing on the other side of the 3 inch thick class, they just
zoomed by so quickly I can't follow them with a video camera. The
dolphins also looked cooler, with the white stripes along their gray
body.

Seeing the animals was a nice experience, but I also got the impression
that the tank was not nearly large enough. Even though it is much bigger
than regulation standards, the dolphins were still simply doing circles
around the tank. There was occasional variations, like sinking deeper or
doing a wider circle, but it was still laps around the pool. I feel
sorry for the beluga whales, whose tank is really small. It's kind of
boring too, being surrounded by walls and glass for 24 hours a day.

To help make the whales' and dolphins' lives better, our project is to
make "toys" for them, so to speak. There is a lot of potential in toys
which take advantage of their sense of echolocation, and it's strange
that not many toys have been designed that way before. Ideally, it would
be cool if the toys could allow the dolphins to interact with humans as
well. There is a sense of this new device allowing people to really feel
that dolphins are intelligent, that dolphins are sentient. I don't know
how well this goal will be fulfilled, but for someone interested in the
phenomenon of intelligence in general, it is fascinating to be learning
so much about another intelligent species.

As I've said in one of my speeches, it's like working on a Facebook to
connect dolphins and humans.

