Title: Computer Science in the K-12 Curriculum
Date: 2008-12-26 06:00
Slug: computer-science-in-the-k-12-curriculum

ACM recently made a statement to the Obama administration about
including computer science in the K-12 curriculum. This only [caught the
attention](http://arstechnica.com/news.ars/post/20081224-acm-wants-computer-science-in-on-obamas-k-12-education-plan.html)
of Ars Technica, but those interested should read the [original
statement](http://www.acm.org/public-policy/ACM_CS_ED_Transition_Final.pdf)
(pdf), which is only 3 pages long.

The Ars Technica article does not offer to many opinions, but I agree
with their opinion that ACM overstated the benefits of computer science.
That "computer science also provides an important skill set for students
entering any career area" is indeed hyperbolic, and for ACM to put most
of the weight of its statement behind that seems to weaken its argument.

Their point stands, however, that much of what exists as "computer
science" in the curriculum is actually information technology. There is
a big difference between knowing how to use a word processor vs. how to
create a word processor. A similar difference can be found if physics
taught you that things fall due to gravity (duh!) and not how
specifically gravity causes the position of objects to change.

This analogy with science serves a second point: the advantage of
teaching computer science is not to "provide an important skill set" for
any career, but because it should be part of common sense. Just as high
school students should know biology (although evolution is still under
debate ;) and physics to explain the world around them, integrated
circuits and computers have become ubiquitous to our daily lives. The
addition of computer science to the middle/high school curriculum will
serve to fill in knowledge about these devices.

Of course, the more abstract objectives of logic and problem solving
skills are still present, but would be treated the same way physics
classes treat the scientific method.

The problem as I see it is that too many people think computers operate
on magic. How computers operate is mysterious and unknowable, and so
people lack knowledge of how to overcome computer problems. I don't
expect everyone to get the source code and debug programs, but they
should know that computers are deterministic.

In fact, although I think programming would be a very good way to learn
about computers and problem solving, I think a large part of a high
school computer science curriculum need not be about writing code. From
a "common sense" perspective, I think it's more important to learn about
the progression from logic circuits to computers, then onto operating
systems and finally the applications. Just as people can talk about
acceleration and velocity without knowing the precise equations, people
should also know how computers work in general despite not knowing how
to fix these problems.

