Title: Thoughts on Time Dollars
Date: 2008-12-24 06:00
Slug: thoughts-on-time-dollars

My mom does some community development type stuff, and she recently
asked me to take photos of some [time
dollars](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Time_Banking), which she will
later use in a presentation. We then got into a discussion of why time
dollars are useful, and here's an outline of what we talked about.

Q: Why use an alternate currency? Printed pieces of paper representing
some amount of time and work is exactly what current money symbolizes.
It seems unnecessary to devise a second system to do exactly the same
thing.

A: These people have they skills and the time, but they are not
necessarily employable by the outside world and have limited money. By
joining the community and receiving some time dollars to start with
[think passing Go in Monopoly], they can work towards living better.
Since the community trades in time dollars, they can get other members
to do things for them with the time dollars they have, and can similarly
help others and receive time dollars in return.

Q: This can also be done with real currency though. If people don't have
money, they don't have to pay market price. They can agree to pay, say,
a dollar for ten minutes of work, and achieve the same results.

A: But then the currency earned can be spent elsewhere. A second purpose
of programs like these is to build community, so you not only find out
more about people living in the same way, but you're also more actively
contributing back. If you don't, eventually you'll run out of time
dollars and have to pay the much higher market price.

Q: This means that these programs cannot be widespread, because once
they are the sense of community is lost. That seems really
counterintuitive.

A: Well, there are programs which have the cooperation with some
merchants. For example, some farmers are working with the community to
sell their produce at prices half in real currency and half in time
dollars. Members are therefore paying less for the food. There are
benefits for the farmer too; they may need some help watering the
fields, and they can use the time dollars they've accumulated to hire
others to do that for them.

Q: That creates a problem though. Since time dollars are initially given
out, and anyone can join the program, they are worth less that real
currency. By including merchants in the program and offering to sell
items half paid in time dollars, you create a conversion rate.
Economically, someone has to lose something; from the examples you gave,
it seems to be the farmers.

A: I guess that's true, but both parties are doing so willingly.

Q: That doesn't solve the problem of losing real money...

Really, I think the use of time dollars is more psychological than
anything else. Creating a new currency just allows people to be open to
trade services, at what are otherwise ridiculously low prices. I think
there should be regulation with regard to taxation and printing, since
there is an implicit exchange rate. Despite all this, however, it just
seems like a second [consensual mass delusion based on fictitious
valueings of abstract
assets.](http://www.thedailyshow.com/video/index.jhtml?videoId=187614&title=survivalist-investment-tips)

