Title: ???
Date: 2009-01-19 06:00
Slug: 873

As you can see from the title, I have a further question (actually, a
test to confirm a hypothesis) about the way Blogspot posts posts with
non-alphanumeric titles. Last week's post had the URL
http://justinnhli.com/posts/2009/01/blog-post\_12.html, the "12"
seemingly from the date. If I am correct, this post should have the URL
http://justinnhli.com/posts/2009/01/blog-post\_19.html. Let's see if
I'm right.

As for last week's real question, the answer may be surprising. There
were two ungrammatic sentences in the list, and they are:

-   I'm doing good. (Obviously)
-   I'm doing great. (wah?)

I was surprised by the second one too, but according to
[Wiktionary](http://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/great), great is only an
adjective and therefore cannot describe the "doing". It doesn't work in
this case as an injection either, which means it's just plain
ungrammatical. Of course, being grammatical doesn't mean everything, as
is shown by:

-   I'm doing best.

This is funny, actually, because "better" and "best" are both
superlatives, which inherently compare one thing with another. "I'm
doing better" compares my current feelings with my past, but "I'm doing
best" - which would implicitly mean I'm feeling the best I have in my
life - just comes across weird.

But that's English for you. If you need further evidence that grammar
isn't everything, consider the following sentence:

-   Colorless green ideas sleep furiously.

This week's question: Why do men like women with long blonde hair, blue
eyes, and large breasts? No, it's not because they have more fun...
