Title: ???
Date: 2009-01-05 06:00
Author: justinnhli
Slug: 881

Last week's question was: if a car's wheels fit perfectly on train
tracks, and the wheels have no tires, does the car needs to be steered?

Here's what I think. If you visit science museums, you may remember
seeing a demonstration where there were parallel downhill tracks, and
you could try different shapes of wheels to keep the axle on the track
on its way downhill. The winner is the wheels where the inner diameter
of each wheel is larger than the outer. This means that there is an
equilibrium point in the middle where the axle sits very well. Unlike
the opposite case where the outer diameter is larger than the inner
diameter, the train wheels push the axle to keep it in the center of the
track, and not pull it on two sides.  
[  
](http://draft.blogger.com/goog_1231000951944)  
[This image](http://www.physclips.unsw.edu.au/jw/graphics/wheel6.gif)
gives a better idea of what I'm talking about.

Car wheels, without tires, are similarly shaped. Here's [an image I
found](http://www.talontire.com/images/crosssection.gif) of the wheel,
and you can see it also has a rim on the inside edge. The progression
from center to the rim is not as smooth as on train wheels, but as long
as there is some protrusion it should hold the car in place on the
tracks.

Which means, like trains, if a car does go on tracks without tires, and
it fits the track perfectly, it will not need to be steered.

For this week, I have one and a half questions:

The title of this post is "???". Blogspot gives a link each individual
post,but removes any punctuation, so that ["Question of the
Week?"](http://justinnhli.blogspot.com/2008/12/question-of-week.html)
ends up at question-of-week.html (I guess they remove common words too).
So what happens if the title was only punctuation? Click on the title of
this post to find out.

Here's the real question. Humans have 5 senses: sight, hearing, touch
(which can be subdivided into pain, heat, and so on), smell, and taste.
Of these 5, language is expressed for sight (reading/writing), hearing
(listening/speaking), and touch (Braille). What would a language based
on the olfactory (smell) or gustatory (taste) systems be like, and
seeing that we haven't developed one, why is it impractical?

