Title: A Small But Important CTY Complaint
Date: 2009-08-13 00:17
Slug: a-small-but-important-cty-complaint

<span class="Apple-style-span"
style="font-family:arial;font-size:13px;"></span>

<div>

CTY ended about a week ago, and I'm still very much in denial about it.
I've mentioned previous that I wish the program would continue, even if
it was just for one session. This summer was everything I had remembered
it to be: the rush of seeing the light go on in the students, being
swept away by the excitement in learning that everyone shows. I do,
however, have one complaint, which I thought this site didn't do as well
in comparison with last year. This involves the communication between
staff members, and in particular, between the residential,
instructional, and administrative staff.

</div>

<div>

</div>

<div>

As a residential camp for middle schoolers, CTY staff is not only
responsible for the education of the campers; we are also responsible
for the emotional and social well being of the kids. If the kids are
older we'd have more problems (like people being in relationships,
breaking up, or God forbid, getting pregnant), but at this age most of
our problems have to do with being homesick, provoking or being provoked
by others, and bullying or being bullied by others. All three happened
to my students this year. Under CTY procedure, as a TA I am required to
talk to the RAs several times every day, to find out if anything has
happened to the kids over the night or during activities. There is a
system of paperwork for everything that happens to a student, and those
are left in mailboxes for staff to read. In theory, this system allows a
rapid dissemination of information on the students, so everyone knows
what's happen.

</div>

<div>

</div>

<div>

What I found this summer was that while the system is designed properly,
people don't really follow them. I have seen TAs and RAs simply bringing
the kids to the drop off point, then walk away after seeing they are
picked up - without talking to that staff. The paperwork system, while
detailed, does not provide a rapid enough response. In one case, I was
lucky to have found out about an incident the morning after from the RA.
They had put in the paperwork as well, but it had taken over a week for
me to be notified of the administrative response. There was a worse
case - I heard about the incident from the RA, and never ended up
reading the paperwork. Although I knew the gist of what had happened, I
didn't really have the details. And since the incident was rather
serious, I would prefer to have it - but I didn't. And finally, there
were things which I never knew until I read the paperwork - like the
fact that one of my students had daily meetings with a member of the
administration.

</div>

<div>

</div>

<div>

Don't get me wrong - things worked out great this summer, and as I said
I had an awesome time. But I was really disappointed by the things I
just pointed out, which not necessarily made my job harder, but it did
give me unpleasant surprises. If I got the chance to talk to the staff
before CTY started, I would say this:

</div>

<div>

</div>

<div>

Administration: My management philosophy is simple - it's about the
people who's close to the action. For a summer camp, that would be the
RAs, the TAs, and the instructors. We are here to make their jobs
easier, here to support them. This means that we might have to work
longer hours to resolve issues as soon as possible, or we might have to
do extra work to ensure classes and activities goes as the RAs and
instructors have planned. We get paid more not because we're more
important, but because we have to work harder.

</div>

<div>

</div>

<div>

RAs: I know you have a tough job - you have to take care of over a dozen
kids all by yourself, for multiple hours at a time, sometimes
sacrificing sleep. But remember that besides making sure the kids are
under supervision at all times, there is a larger goal: to keep them
excited and motivated for class. Think about it this way: you can spend
5 minutes talking (and listening!) to the TA and instructor about a
problem that arose, or you can spend hours afterwards trying to comfort
the student, explain to the administration, or even the parent, about
what happened. So please, talk to your TAs and instructors.

</div>

<div>

</div>

<div>

TAs and Instructors: You're what the camp is about. Congratulations. But
your job is not just to teach the kids; as with the RAs, you have to
make sure the students are having a good time. This certainly involves
finding out about things which happened in the dorm, or during
activities - and remember, finding out earlier saves time. If you could,
however, lead an activity! Join the talent show! The kids are never more
excited than seeing their TAs and instructors spending time with them
outside of the classroom. If it doesn't earn you friends, it at least
earns you camaraderie - and that goes a long way in talking with the
students.

</div>
