Title: Abortion
Date: 2009-02-06 06:00
Slug: abortion

I recently had an online discussion about religion, gay marriage, and
abortion with a bunch of strangers. It was an exhilarating experience.
It occurred to me that while I've
[written](http://justinnhli.com/posts/2007/10/religion-as-mind-body-paradox.html)
[quite](http://justinnhli.com/posts/2007/12/prove-of-god.html)
[a](http://justinnhli.com/posts/2008/05/marriage-and-society.html)
[bit](http://justinnhli.com/posts/2008/10/social-interaction-russell-and-morals.html)
about the first two, I have yet to address the latter.

I think my views are logically entailed by several facts/assumptions:

-   Fetuses, up to a certain point, are not conscious beings
-   Humans are animals
-   We kill animals - taking certain precautions to avoid inflicting
    pain

That's it. If humans are just animals, then the consideration of killing
humans should be no different. Of course, there are differences: humans
are intelligent, we are conscious, etc. That's why the first assumption
is there. It might turn out that children are born conscious of
themselves, but that's rather unlikely. I also take the view that
consciousness entails intelligence, so getting rid of consciousness
would solve the intelligence problem as well. Since fetuses up to a
certain stage are not conscious, they should be treated as any other
animal.

The argument is simple from that point. When we kill cows, chickens,
etc. we (in general) use procedures which make sure the animal does not
feel pain, or otherwise suffer before it's death. This courtesy towards
*life* should be offered to fetuses as well. And it is also easy to see
that only at some point in development the fetus has nerves and
therefore can feel pain. And therefore, abortion should be allowed up to
that point.

Of course, it might be possible to perform euthanasia on the fetus after
that point as well. I suppose I'm fine with this too.

Note that whether abortion is ethical is a different question from
whether people should abort. Just because you can jump out of a window
and kill yourself doesn't mean you should; in fact, I personally would
advice people to keep their babies. But I don't have a moral qualm
against those who abort (before said deadline) either.

I would like to share one more thing. In my discussion, someone brought
up the idea that abortion is wrong because of legal rights... for the
father. If the child is a product of both the father and the mother (so
far...), why should the mother have the sole rights to abort? I think
this argument has merit, but because of biological and other costs to
the mother, I don't think they should have an equal say either. Of
course, this is not as simple as taking the weighted average of each
other's arguments. But at least it's a viable framework to look at
abortion.

