Title: Ambigrams and Psychology
Date: 2008-01-02 05:29
Slug: ambigrams-and-psychology

I'm more than a little behind in posting.

Every year around winter I get into an art mood, and work on either
[ambigrams](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ambigram) or [origami
architecture](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Origamic_architecture) cards.
I've done a few ambigrams before, but I didn't think about the
psychology behind it until now.

When I first started playing around with amibgrams, I showed a few to
other people. Someone then commented that it's just a visual trick,
because humans tend to fit what they see into categories they are
already familiar with. In this case, we only see letters the right side
up, and ignore the other potential interpretation of the letters being
up side down.

Thinking about that a few days ago, I was reminded of how humans seem to
have a special brain area for recognizing faces. Humans apparently need
to recognize faces so frequently that by two months there is already a
[brain area which
activates](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Face_perception#Development_of_face_perception)
on perceiving a face. We have a [tendency to see
faces](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pareidolia) in
[random](http://www.yfinder.de/driven/index.php/2007/w25/)
[objects](http://www.pages.drexel.edu/%7Erjm72/final/), and some people
have a [selective disability in recognizing
faces](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Prosopagnosia). More related to
ambigrams though is the [Thatcher
effect](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thatcher_effect), how humans can't
immediately identify "problems" in upside down faces, which are
otherwise rather... eye-catching when viewed the right side up.

I think the same thing happens with ambigrams. We become so accustomed
to reading letters and words right side up that we ignore small features
changes. It just so happens that these changes form the same letters (or
sometimes different letters) up side down, hence creating the ambigram.

If this theory works out, words that are more common would be easier to
see, because of the reader's familiarity with that sequence of letters.
For example, someone named Earnest might be faster to read his name in
an ambigram, compared with other people who would see the adjective.
Seems like it would be a pretty cool psychology experiment.

