Title: Atlas Shrugged
Date: 2010-07-25 07:06
Author: justinnhli
Slug: atlas-shrugged

> Is a man not entitled to the sweat of his brow?
>
> No, says the man in Washington; it belongs to the poor.  
> No, says the man in the Vatican; it belongs to God.  
> No, says the man in Moscow; it belongs to everyone.
>
> I rejected those answers.
>
> - Andrew Ryan, founder of the city of Rapture

The above quote is from
[BioShock](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bioshock), a first person
shooter where the player stumbles upon the ruins of Rapture. The setting
of the game borrows heavily from Ayn Rand's philosophy (as the
similarity between the names Andrew Ryan and Ayn Rand suggests),
especially from the philosophy espoused in her magnum opus, Atlas
Shrugged. I myself finished the book last week, after my friend
[Faye](http://fayezor.blogspot.com/) prompted me to read one chapter. It
was the original book I wanted to read of Rand's, before its
unavailability from the library forced me to read [The
Fountainhead](http://justinnhli.blogspot.com/2009/08/fountainhead.html)
instead. I thought I would start my conversation with Faye by writing
this post.

The basic premise of Atlas Shrugged asks one question: what if all the
innovators of the world disappeared? Their choice to do so is rational
in the setting of the book: the government (and the world in general)
has evolved to the point where the work of any innovator is taken from
them unfairly. As protest against this policy, the innovators
collectively disappear, to show the world what will happen if they
refuse to continue contributing their work without appropriate payment.
As a consequence of their refusal to work, to "sanction the victim", the
world collapses with no one producing anything of value. This is the
meaning of the novel's title - those who carry civilization forward, the
Atlas' of the world, becomes apathetic to those they are carrying. This
is also why the novel was originally titled "The Strike".

Describing the precise moral dilemma that the book presents is
difficult. I think the conflict reduces down to these two principles,
both commonly accepted morals, which Rand suggests is in conflict:

1.  Men are brothers in life, and must take care of each other. We must
    ensure that each person is treated fairly, and those more fortunate
    must contribute to help those less so.
2.  Men are their own masters, and we must create our own destiny. No
    one else is in charge of our happiness, and we must work to maximize
    the value and desirability of our future.

In Atlas Shrugged, Rand sets these two morals in opposition. Within the
novel, the government puts the needs of the majority over the right of
the individual. To ensure that everyone in society is treated fairly,
that those who have not risen to the top are given chances to do so, the
government routinely limits the output of industries and commandeers its
goods for those in need, with the force of the law at its side.

The problem is not that the able - and therefore the rich - are giving
money to the poor, but that the poor are not giving value back. Ask
yourself this question: if you are required, by law, to give money to
pan-handlers who have nothing to offer you in return, would you? If you
answered no, consider that this is exactly what taxes and social welfare
amounts to. The novel exaggerates this to dystopian degrees, but the
scenarios are qualitatively equivalent.

In protest against this philosophy of free-loading, the heroes of Atlas
Shrugged retreat from the world to their own isolated village, where the
rule of the land is laissez-faire capitalism. Everyone must earn their
own living, and trade occurs because both parties want something the
other has - in other words, if one person gives another money, it is
because the second person has something the first wants. There is no
government in the conventional sense: instead of taxes required by law,
money is given voluntarily to protect the personal rights of
individuals, including their right to property and right to physical
well-being. That is the sole function of the government; there is no
social welfare, and public utilities such as roads and water are
privately owned, its existence prompted by its need. It is the rational
self-interest which drives the exchange of money, not the law and its
implied threat of physical force.

Rand's novel goes on to show that, without the productive capabilities
of the heroes, the outside world collapses. The welfare state cannot
help the poor, as there is nothing of value left to give to them. The
government attempts to force the producers to return through torture but
the producers, showing their willingness to die for the cause, proves
that there is no way to force a person to think. The end of the novel
suggests that the world has collapsed sufficiently for the producers to
reemerge, to establish a society based on their own morals.

For me, the story raises the following questions, which I will address
in turn:

1.  Are the two principles mentioned above necessarily in conflict? Is
    the adherence to the first necessarily destructive?
2.  In The Fountainhead, Rand suggests that a man's work (that is, his
    happiness) should be his only moral, other people's opinions of it
    be damned. And yet, here our heroes change their behavior because of
    other people. Are these two messages in conflict, or can they be
    reconciled?
3.  Most importantly, how practical is the philosophy that Rand
    proposes? How should we evaluate its merits?

To answer the first question, I will first ask whether the first
principle is necessarily destructive. I argue that, although it maybe
not always cause the dystopia painted in the novel, it definitely does
is not the most constructive of principles. Consider a decision
theoretic viewpoint: if you can give your money to two people, one who
will give you something in return and one who won't, rationality
dictates that you should give the money to the person who will give you
value; otherwise, you will incur an opportunity cost. The reason for
this is that trade is not a zero-sum game. This comes directly from Adam
Smith: the cost of each person manufacturing what they need is higher
than specializing then trading, and therefore both people come out ahead
by trading. In contrast, the second give-and-take scenario is zero-sum:
what you give away is exactly what the other person receives. Therefore,
although not necessarily destructive, the principle of giving is also
not the most valuable one to follow.

This answer to the second part of the question also suggests an answer
to the first. If we take our happiness to be our only moral, then the
extra cost of giving to others compared to trading implies that we are
not as valuable as we could be. Since giving reduces our productive
capability in the long run, these two principles, if standing by
themselves, are directly in conflict.

Here I need to make side notes to address two issues: that of people who
absolutely need aid, and that emotion and/or friendship in the world
described above.

First, the treatment of people who need aid. Some might object that
there are two categories of the poor: those intentionally lazy who
pan-handle because they don't want to work, and those truly incapable of
work and therefore depends on the welfare of others to survive. Surely
the latter group deserve help from people more able than them. That may
be, but consider the implication of such a dichotomy. A careful reading
of the above suggests that the measure of a person is always measured by
their ability to produce (their *value*), not their ability to consume
(their *need*). Saying someone depends on the generosity of other people
implies they have nothing to trade. To put it crudely, someone who can
only survive with the help of others is someone who has no worth as an
individual, who cannot create anything of value at all. Surely the idea
that some people are worthless is crueler than the idea that we must all
act in rational self-interest. In fact, such a moral presupposes that
everyone has something to offer, something of value to trade; this is
the optimism inherent in the philosophy.

Second, the nature of friendship and love. In taking a utilitarian view
of human relationships, it might be argued that non-material aspects of
life are left out, such as friendship and love. Love is not about a
person's value and what one can gain from it; it is precisely about
ignoring personal flaws. Rand offers this answer in Atlas Shrugged, as
said by the minor villain Lillian Rearden:

> "If you loved your brother, you'd give him a job he didn't deserve,
> precisely because he didn't deserve it - *that* would be true love and
> kindness and brotherhood. Else what's love for? If a man *deserves* a
> job, there's no virtue in giving it to him. Virtue is the giving of
> the undeserved."

Is this the reason people love one another, because they do not deserve
it? This ultimately reduces to the same pessimistic outlook by those who
claim some people need alms, but I will offer another argument. Love and
friendship may not be about the material/productive value of a person,
but it is definitely about personal happiness. The suffering of an
unappreciated friendship and of an unrequited love is obvious, and this
stems from love and friendship also being trades: both people gain more
from interacting with each other than from being alone. In the realm of
relationships, this is the value that each person is offering.

The second question above compares the philosophy of The Fountainhead
with that of Atlas Shrugged. Rand, speaking through Roark at his second
trial, gives this description of the ideal man:

> "[The egotist] is not concerned with [others] in any primary matter.
> Not in his aim, not in his motive, not in his thinking, not in his
> desires, not in the source of his energy... Independence is the only
> gauge of human virtue and value. What a man is and makes of himself;
> not what he has or hasn't done for others."

The heroes of Atlas Shrugged are all Howard Roarks of their professions.
Rand, in an early note for Atlas Shrugged, writes, "In The
Fountainhead... the theme was Roark - not Roark's relation to the world.
Now it will be the relation." Each of the innovators embody the same
philosophy expounded by Roark, and yet their main act - to withdraw from
the world - is driven solely by the action of others. Although this
seems to directly conflict with Roark's morals, the differences are
explainable.

The main source of this divergence is that Roark and the heroes of Atlas
Shrugged lived in very different worlds. While both societies disapprove
of the character's rugged individualism, there was no government
directive against Roark's work in The Fountainhead. Roark could design
buildings to the fullest of his ability, while Dagny, Rearden, and
others were prohibited from producing by laws which limited their
output. In other parts of the speech quoted above, Roark said, "We are
approaching a world in which I cannot permit myself to live." That Roark
did not withdraw from the world is therefore a matter of degree - he,
like Dagny, believed that society can still be saved from collectivism.
The implication is that should Roark find himself in "a world in which
[he] cannot permit [him]self to live", he would have followed Galt's
lead to go on strike.

Further more, one's refusal to carry the world is not the same as a
rejection of one's work. While hiding from the government, all the
innovators continue producing - their village is powered by the
inventions of its resident engineers and entertained by the work of its
artists. This is part of the message of Atlas Shrugged and echoes the
philosophy of The Fountainhead, that the producers of the world can
continue to produce without the looters, while the looters cannot live
without the producers.

Finally, despite Roark's society being in a better state than Galt's,
Roark himself briefly retreated from it - preferring to take the
laborer's job of a quarry worker over letting others butcher his
buildings. He returned when he found a client who appreciates his work,
as Galt does when the world learns to appreciate his.

The meaning of Roark's life, as he explained to Wynand, is his work.
True to his word, his work does not depend on others in any meaningful
way, not in an obligation to support looters, nor to deliberately
destroy them. In a world where his is actively prevented from
producing - and therefore making his life meaningless - withdrawing from
that world may be the only choice consistent with his philosophy.

The final question, perhaps the most important one, asks for an
evaluation of the philosophy of Atlas Shrugged. Rand's ideal society
Galt's Gulch, the village the heroes retreat to, where there is minimal
government, each individual works to his fullest capacity, and there is
an abundance of resources to be exploited. Although Rand would be
horrified by this comparison, the above description evokes another ideal
society: Thomas More's
[Utopia](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Utopia_%28book%29).

In many ways, More's Utopia is the polar opposite of Rand's ideal: there
is no personal property, people request goods as they need them, slavery
is pervasive (owned by the state), atheists are despised, and women hold
a notably lower role than men. But the ultimate goal of both societies
is the same: everyone knows their role in society (be it assigned or
self-discovered) and works to their capacity. Utopia - which went on to
inspire Marxism and communism - has obvious flaws: greedy dictates that
some will request more goods than they need, which leads to a race until
all state owned property is taken. The flaws of Rand's Galt's Gulch is
less obvious.

Consider the equivalent of greed in Galt's Gulch. Since everyone is
driven by rational self-interest, and since there is no government to
provide social welfare, anyone who refuses to work will have no means to
support themselves. Their rationality, therefore, requires them to
produce value for trade, the cheapest and only method to acquire all the
amenities for living. Because nothing is free, simply greed will not
lead to the society's downfall.

There are, however, other forms of greed and sloth. Recall that property
rights are maintained by essentially a privatized police force. What if
the difference in wealth is large enough such that is it more profitable
to rob than to produce? Even with the premise that everyone can produce
value, that value may vary greatly between individuals; free capitalism
means this variance will result in great economic inequity. When gaining
wealth by force is quicker than trading what value one has, society
quickly breaks down without the trust and freedom trade requires.
Together with the always precarious assumption of general human
rationality, Galt's Gulch will not survive for much longer than Utopia.

Both More's and Rand's ideal world can only be sustained by ignoring
crucial parts of human nature. Both societies might survive if done in
small scale, where everyone involved trusts everyone else completely.
There are two ironies in this conclusion for Rand. First, just as the
looters cannot force the innovators to produce ideas, the innovators
cannot force the looters to be rational or to value property rights as
much as they do. Second, and more insultingly, Rand believes in an
objective reality, that things are what they are and that individuals
are not to create their own reality but to perceive the true one. That
Rand believes in the possibility of a society like Galt's Gulch is
perhaps the grossest violation of this tenet of her philosophy.

What conclusions can we draw from Atlas Shrugged? As a continuation of
The Fountainhead and as a work to demonstrate the relationship between
innovators and the world, Atlas Shrugged achieves its purpose
beautifully. As Rand's magnum opus, it deserves the attention is has
received. Sadly, as a philosophical guide for future societies, there
are still flaws to be resolved before Rand's ideal could be realized.

### Post Script 1: Atlas Shrugged and the Bible

I think there is an insightful analogy of Atlas Shrugged an objectivist
bible of sorts. This works in three senses:

-   as the Bible holds the core tenets of Christianity, so does Atlas
    Shrugged hold the core tenets of objectivism
-   both are fictional accounts which demonstrate how one's life is to
    be lived
-   both offer assurance that such a life ultimately results in
    happiness.

A key difference, however, is that the Bible offers only faith as the
proof of its correctness, while Atlas Shrugged (and objectivism)
promotes reason - a standard with which objectivism itself could be
judged. At least in theory; see Post Script 3.

### Post Script 2: On Style

Between The Fountainhead and Atlas Shrugged, I thought the former was
better written. In Atlas Shrugged Rand gives away too much of people's
thoughts - often punctuating their speech and/or the narration. By
making her character's motivations explicit, their actions lose some of
the power in demonstrating what they think. In fact, in earlier drafts
of The Fountainhead, Rand had written, "Don't dialog thoughts - narrate
them". Perhaps because I have selectively reread The Fountainhead
multiple times, there were also sections of Atlas Shrugged where the
descriptions and/or the characters' actions were predictable.

There is, however, something I thought Rand did superbly: she managed
create, in a novel set in "modern" times, the elements of a fantasy. In
particular, the three "princes" of the world - Francisco D'Anconia,
Ragnar Danneskjold, and John Galt - have an air of breathlessness about
them, like the ancient heroes who fantasy protagonists discover are
still alive (Zedd of Terry Goodkind's Sword of Truth series - not
coincidentally heavily philosophical and based on Rand's work - comes to
mind, but many characters from the Dragon Raja series more closely
approximates this). This made their eventual appearance highly
anticipated and enjoyable.

### Post Script 3: The Ayn Rand Cult

In Why People Believe Weird Things, Mike Shermer talks about an unlikely
cult: objectivism. Being believers in reason, the higher echelons of
this movement (those closest to Rand personally) somehow developed a
creed which upholds that, among other statements:

-   Ayn Rand, by virtue of her philosophical genius, is the supreme
    arbiter in any issue pertaining to what is rational, moral, or
    appropriate to man's life on earth
-   The measure of one's virtue is intrinsically tied to the position
    one takes regarding Ayn Rand and her work
-   It is best not to say most of these things explicitly; one must
    always maintain that one arrives at one's beliefs solely by reason.

A friend of mine, after learning that I enjoyed The Fountainhead, joked
that I pronounce Ann Arbor as "Ayn Arbor". I replied that I liker her
philosophy, not her person.

