Title: Book Reviews
Date: 2009-01-21 06:00
Author: justinnhli
Slug: book-reviews

I finished 3 books in the last 2 weeks, and I would like to jot down
some thoughts on them.* *

*The Essential Turing*, edited by Jack Copeland

This was a heavy book, and I don't mean weight (although it was too).
Turing is one of those people I find hard to reconcile; while I
simultaneously know of the Turing Machine and the Turing Test, somehow I
separate them so far in my mind that I forget it's the same person who
made those two. The first part of this book is highly mathematical, as
it contains the very paper which Turing suggested his universal Turing
machine. I skimmed most of that paper, as I didn't want to follow all
the details, but I did learn the basic reason why the halting problem is
undecidable. The book goes through another paper, then talks about
Turing's involvement with breaking the Enigma. Only the last part is on
AI, and in retrospect Turing does have some far-sighted ideas. The
editor seems a little bit too fond of Turing though. Overall, the book
was not too bad a read (not including the mathematics part).

*Flowers for Algernon*, by Daniel Keyes* *

My first fiction book in a while. While I've felt [empathy with the
character](http://justinnhli.blogspot.com/2009/01/flowers-for-algernon.html)
on human relations, I also share his feelings on academia. On talking
with some people at his local college, the protagonist finds that people
take their fields too narrowly, and there's not enough overarching work
being done. I really am afraid of falling into the mold of [Ziman's
scientists](http://justinnhli.blogspot.com/2009/01/shape-of-educated-man.html),
knowing "more and more about less and less". That aside, this book is
worth a read.*  
*

*Godel, Escher, Bach: an Eternal Golden Braid*, by Douglas Hofstadter

I had high expectations for this book, as it was highly recommended by
many people, especially for compute science/artificial intelligence
types like me. After reading it's entirety in a week, however, I find
the hype a little inaccurate. While the concepts in the book are
somewhat novel, I don't like several choices in Hofstadter's writing.
The first definition stems from this book being 30 years old, during
which computers reached the world class level of chess, genetic
programming developed, and computers in general became a lot more
powerful (computationally, not mathematically) than at the time of
writing. These, however, are merely artifacts of when the book was
written. I am more mindful that Hofstadter prefers to give his own names
to theories than use the original. I feel it actually made the proofs a
little more opaque. Hofstadter tries to tie the book together with a
theme, but this theme is hard to detect - no wonder other readers have
been confused as to what the central message of the book was, as the
author noted in the 20 anniversary preface. In praise of the book
though, I think the dialogues are ingenious, not only through their
formal (form-related) isomorphisms to Bach's works, but in various word
play and other humor.

I did, on the other hand, get one or two - not too many, just one or
two - ideas from the book. I would say that they have been near the
surface of my thoughts for a while, although no doubt Hofstadter would
argue that the information was all in the book...

As a result of reading these books, and taking courses in operation
semantics and knowledge representation, suddenly my quarter is filled
with references to Godel, Church, and Turing. Which isn't bad, I
suppose; I've always wanted to learn about them.

PS. I highly recommend [book darts](http://www.bookdarts.com/) (also
available on
[Amazon](http://www.amazon.com/Book-Darts-Bookmarks-Passage-Marks/dp/0681229101))
to note interesting passages. Despite their crappy website, they have
been invaluable in keeping track of worthwhile sections to transcribe
later *en masse*.

