Title: Calendarmania
Date: 2007-12-04 07:00
Slug: calendarmania

Since college I've had an obsession with calendars. I guess before that
I was more obsessed with keeping records of things I do (chat logs,
emails, whatever), and while I still keep those, I'm not as anal about
them as I was before.

But calendars, I'm always trying to make mine better. I came across
David Seah's [compact
calendar](http://davidseah.com/blog/compact-calendar/) today, and I
thought, wow, how elegant. My calendar has days going down the page, and
hours going across, which is not intuitive at all (although of course
there's nothing <span style="font-style:italic;">wrong</span> with it;
it's just uncommon). Seah's design though, preserves the Sunday-Saturday
format and still shows time as one continuous line. It's on a different
scale than mine too; mine is in terms of hours, whereas this is in terms
of days. Consequently, while I can schedule my hourly activities very
well, I sometimes lose track of days. The opposite is probably true for
Seah's design.

Another interesting calendar I came across a while back is [Yann le
Coroller](http://www.kub.fr/design/planner.html)'s personal information
manager (PIM) design. The scope of a PIM is broader than a simple
calendar, expanding to include an address book and all that. My
"calendar" also serves as my to do list and birthday reminder, for
example, and therefore is a limited PIM. According to Wikipedia, a PIM
may also include emails (which I use Thunderbird for), journals (mix of
HTML and Bash script), contact information (Gmail; I'm working on
consolidating it but Gmail's stubbornly [refusing to
import](http://justinnhli.com/posts/2007/11/bugger-blog-2.html) my
files correctly), news feeds (Google Reader), and even project
management (I'm trying to integrate Gantt chart features into my
calendar).

Anyway, le Coroller's site seem to be down right now, but I seem to
remember there's a a panel which provides different information
depending on what you click. Sounds really general, doesn't it. I think
the appeal of his design was more in having everything in one place as
opposed to the elegance shown in Seah's compact calendar.

I'm striving to do both. I smell another calendar redesign coming up...

