Title: Challenges
Date: 2009-11-20 15:46
Slug: challenges

This has been a hard week for me.

On Tuesday I got back my midterm for intro to AI. The material for the
course is mostly stuff I'd already done before, so Ive never been too
worried about my grade. And, seeing that I got 85% on the midterm, I was
correct. What had an undercurrent of an effect on me, which I didn't
feel until that evening, was that my score was below both the mean and
the average.

And all of a sudden, I started questioning myself. Am I really cut out
to be in grad school? Can I make the original contributions that are
required of me?

Then there's the anxiety of not knowing how I did in my machine learning
midterm last week. Although I have taken a machine learning course
before, this course is much more statistically oriented. While I am not
completely clueless about statistics, the only course I took on it was
in my junior year. I was definitely not up to scratch with my
probabilities and density/mass functions, and it was a struggle to
understand what the class was about.

It's strange, because I imagine that's how some people must feel even in
high school. For people who are not particularly gifted at math, or
science, or whatever subject, being required to take those courses must
have been difficult for them. I have never had that problem - most of
the courses I took even in college came easily to me, and very rarely
did I really have to push myself to even get by in a class. With the
combination of machine learning, and being below average in AI, I got a
glimpse of what school must have felt like for some people.

Last summer when I first worked at CTY, one of the things which struck
me the most during orientation was something not about me or the staff,
but about the kids. Someone who has worked at CTY for many years
commented that while the kids can do a lot of things by themselves, at
some point when they get older they /have/ to work with each other,
because what they're doing is simply beyond the capability of any single
person. I remembered that comment, and even put it in my journal,
because I wondered if that was the case for me too. Just as before CTY
the students might not have needed to work together, and therefore have
poor teamwork skills, I could phrase my own life in those terms.
Everything up to and including college had a fixed upper boundary on
what you could do. In elementary school you had to master
multiplication, in high school it was calculus, and in college some
selected topics within a certain field. I was smart, so I did all this
without problems, but I wasn't smart enough to skip all the way to
college or grad school before my age.

But once college ends, the world is wide open. In grad school and in
research, the things you are learning may not have an agreed upon
answer. The question might not even have been asked. Each professor that
you deal with personally have expertise, and what they studied might not
even have occurred to you. It is exciting for the same reason, but it
also meant that things will not come easily anymore. The material is
more recent - no longer are we studying the creation of some guy in the
renaissance (calculus), but concepts and algorithms developed in the
last 50 years, maybe even the last 10 years.

I was just suddenly overwhelmed by all of this, and wondered if I really
would make my mark among all these giants.

The feeling passed by Wednesday afternoon, but the advice remains: pull
yourself together, Justin.

