Title: Complex Systems? Or Learning? Or...?
Date: 2008-12-01 16:57
Author: justinnhli
Slug: complex-systems-or-learning-or

As you probably know, I've been working on my statement of purpose over
the last two weeks or more... Actually, now I don't know if it's a good
idea to write about it here, since it reflects badly on my application.
But I will go on anyway.

One of the things I needed to put in my statement is what I specifically
want to specialize in. It doesn't have to be what I eventually do
research in, but it does tie the entire essay together. At first I was
thinking of using complex systems, since that was what I've been
obsessed with for the past quarter, working with Sugarscape and all. And
then I realized I don't really have much to say about that, and I'm not
interested in the direct application of complex systems to computer
science, which deals with network flow and analysis. You can also do
distributed systems, of course, but that's also more hardware related.

So in the middle of writing, I had to figure out what really gets me
about artificial intelligence. And the more I thought, the more I leaned
towards cognitive modeling. It's kinda funny, because I was more into it
during my first two years of college. In junior year I took all
information retrieval classes, and have been more worried about making
intelligent machines than with modeling humans. But I think that my true
dream in AI is learning. Not like machine learning, which is maths and
statistics, but learning in the general sense. More along the lines of
case-based reasoning and knowledge bases.

I can only hope that's the right choice... funny, I always thought I
knew what I was doing, until I actually try to write it down.

On the other hand, When I started writing the statement, the first thing
that came to mind on why I chose AI was that I had a God complex. I want
to create as God did, and show that He is nothing special. In that
sense, somehow my interest in AI and my interest in religion has
intertwined. The is something appealing about things like artificial
life, where you can potentially create a whole eco-system. I think it
says something about religion in a very sciency way.

Anyway, the last thing I'm going to say is that since I'm not applying
to Berkeley anymore, I'm only applying to 3 schools. Since there is
significant risk of me not getting into any of them, my backup plan is
to apply for Teach for America (which, arguably, is equally hard to get
into). And if that fails, hiking the PCT. Ah life.

