Title: Computer as a Container
Date: 2008-01-07 14:33
Slug: computer-as-a-container

I came across a [New York Times
article](http://www.nytimes.com/2008/01/07/us/07bar.html?ref=us) the
other day titled "If Your Hard Drive Could Testify..." It talked about
how the law is ambiguous as to the nature of the computer, whether it is
a container like a box, or whether it is an extension of our body, like
how the brain "stores" memories. The difference is that a container can
be freely searched by authorities at the border (for illegal firearms,
drugs, etc.), while bodily invasions require a "reasonable suspicion".

The implications of such a definition is broad. If a computer can be
freely searched at the border, then "border authorities could
systematically collect all of the information contained on every laptop
computer, BlackBerry and other electronic device carried across our
national borders by every traveler, American or foreign."

CNET goes into the second mentioned case with a [little more
detail](http://www.news.com/8301-13578_3-9834495-38.html). I did a quick
search and also came across [this little
incident](http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/sci/tech/150465.stm). A [full
account from the
reporter](http://www.chiark.greenend.org.uk/pipermail/ukcrypto/1998-August/041371.html)
is also online.

More so than privacy issues, it was the technological capabilities of
the scanner which I was more curious about. When I read the NYTimes
article, I had immediately wondered if the traveler had been using
Windows, which surely the scanners would work on, or at the very least
the border authorities could operate. Macs are becoming more popular,
too, so they might work. I use Linux, which natively runs on ext2/ext3
filesystems. Somehow I don't think the scanner would work on that. And
then the incident I found mentioned encrypted drives...

I wish I was there to see the customs officer's face. It would also be
fun to see the computer start, only for her to be dropped into a command
line login shell. "Oh, it doesn't work on... er, Linux, right?"

\*Snicker\*

