Title: Daniel Dennet and Memes
Date: 2008-11-02 19:32
Author: justinnhli
Slug: daniel-dennet-and-memes

I just finished Daniel Dennett's book Breaking the Spell, and after
hearing him talk on Thursday, I have a few comments to make.

First, Dennett is an excellent speaker. He is humorous and
knowledgeable. My only critique of him is that sometimes you forget why
the current topic is under discussion; it somehow makes you lose sight
of the his overall point. This is much more obvious in his book, because
there's space for his words and thoughts to wander.

Before I go on, let me give two examples of his humor:

-   It is obvious enough why [people use anthropomorphic language to
    describe God]: it permits them to carry over all the connocations
    required to make any sense of a *personal* love of God. One can
    feel, I suppose, a certain *affection* or *gratitude* for a law of
    nature - "Good ol' gravity, she ust never lets you down!" - but the
    proper object of adoration really has to be some sort of *person*.
-   Prolonged exposure to the fumes of incense and burning candles may
    have some detrimental health effect, concluded one recent study
    (Lung et al. [I'm not kidding] [sic], 2003), ...

The way he weaves jokes into his story telling is impressive, and it
keeps his audience's attention.

A lot of ideas were presented in his speech, and even more in his book,
but one in particular stands out. I've explained before [Richard
Dawkin's interpretation of
evolution](http://ninghui48.blogspot.com/2008/02/supertheory-of-evolution.html),
and since Dennett makes use of memes in his explanation for religion,
the same idea was expressed in his book. This was also mentioned in his
speech, which was where this next idea came to me.

Dennett suggested that memes, like genes, evolve. They under go the same
process of speciation and differentiation, in genes through enzymes
making errors, and in memes by people making errors when doing a ritual
(by that I mean any action which the meme consists of). Memes are what
are generally called "culture"; lolcats are a feature of the internet
community - more specificly, the geek crowd - and by simply mentioning
it here I am ensuring the concept passes on.

In his book, Dennett suggests that memes provide another information
highway between parent and child, that the child learns cultural
behavior from its parent not through genes but through memes. Religion
is one of them, and Dennett suggests that as a meme it has adapted by
taking advantage of certain human traits, like our tendency to
anthropomorphize and to find cause and effect relationships. What struck
me was that memes are built *on top of* genes. Without these biological
tendencies, certain memes wouldn't exist; and for animals, without the
biological sophistication to support a "culture", memes don't exist at
all\*. By extension, then, there are probobably evolutionary objects,
the existence of which depends on the complexity of certain memes. I
wonder if anyone has made conjectures as to what these might be like?

For some reason this makes me think of
[Spore](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Spore_%282008_video_game%29).  
\* I'm not sure if Dennett would agree with this point; there are
probably behaviors in the animal kingdom, among social animals like
great apes and dolphins, which are passed along by the socially. In
fact, I can name one: the bubble blowing behavior in dolphins is group
dependent, and only dolphins which live in proximity of others who know
how to blow bubbles learn how to do it themselves. Since this behavior
is not genetic, it is arguably memetic. Perhaps the lower limit for
memes is one of communication, not of consciousness.

