Title: Digital Object Permanence
Date: 2008-02-04 21:26
Author: justinnhli
Slug: digital-object-permanence

Of my four classes and research, philosophy and HCI makes me think the
hardest. And as someone who likes to minimize the work they do, I often
just translate those thoughts into posts.

Last week, discussion during the class suggested that people think of
paper as a more permanent storage option than magnetic disks. If a
document or a book is in paper, it is tangible, whereas it seems much
easier for the book to disappear if it's just stored in cyberspace. Of
course, people lose pieces of paper all the time, but at least while
they have it it's touchable. It was also suggested that people need to
get used to the notion of digital storage, that the document or book
will still be there when the user turns on the computer again, and won't
simply disappear for no reason.

Phrased that way, the problem reminded me of the concept of [object
permanence](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Object_permanence). Originally
used to describe a concept learned by infants as early as 8 months old,
it seems that adults will have the learn the concept all over again when
they familiarize themselves with digital technology.

I think part of the problem is that the older generation have not had as
much experience with technology and digital equipment. It seems to me
that my generation, a generation which has grown up on computers and
iPods and various other digital gadgetry, have no problems with the
concept. In fact, if a file mysteriously disappears on people's hard
disk, they would a lot more surprised than if the file remained where
the user last "saw" it.

Of course, at a certain level the concept is the same: what is real
remains real over time, if nothing happens to it. This applies to balls
that you hide with your body, to paper stored in filing cabinets, to
tiny electrons in the hard disk of your computer. Besides familiarity
and experience with digital technology, another problem would be that
the general population is simply not as educated about how hard disks
work. Because the method of storage is imperceptibly small, people lose
their sense of object permanence.

All that being said, I don't think paper can be completely replaced by
technology... yet.

