Title: Domain Mapping
Date: 2009-02-11 06:00
Author: justinnhli
Slug: domain-mapping

In my Sociology of Religion course we recently finished Christian
Smith's American Evangelicalism
([a](http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0226764192/shelfari-20)/[bn](http://search.barnesandnoble.com/American-Evangelicalism/Christian-Smith/e/9780226764191/?itm=7)).
The book is really good; it's one of the few books that, as I read and
had questions, eventually answers them. Although sociologists talk about
a general secularization of society, what we see in everyday life is
that religion is still very much alive. Smith's book looks at why this
is, and he forms his subcultural identity theory based on an earlier
secularization theory of pluralism. One of Smith's idea is that, looking
at religion as a competitive market, the "fittest" religion gets the
largest congregation.

This idea, although a little heretical at first, actually has a lot of
merit. I highly recommend Smith's book for more details, but one of his
points is that a changing religion doesn't equate to a religion giving
ground to science; it's merely adapting to what society wants. This
would be equivalent to businesses trying to brand differentiate; it's
merely a strategy (albeit an unconscious one) to survive.

The idea of mapping one domain to another is old. This is the most
obvious in mathematics: Godel's proof of incompleteness rests on mapping
the metamathematics language (or any formal system) back to mathematics
itself. It goes back further, however, with Descartes. In modern times
it seems natural do talk about geometry in terms of *x* and *y*, but
such a mapping between geometry and algebra was not always obvious to
mathematicians. The main idea is that mappings, provided they are
correct and you know the limits of any particular map, provide new
perspectives on looking at the original domain.

For example, the mapping of religion to economics suggests price
discrimination within a church. And with megachurches, we do see that:
people can walk in and walk out on Sundays only, or they can join the
plethora of prayer groups, social outreach projects, and other
activities offered during the week. To each his own; if someone is
willing to spend time (more on this in a bit) working for the church and
strengthening it, the church will draw them in. They are the consumers
at the left end of the demand curve, willing to pay a large sum for
religion. For the others who are not as interested, well, they can just
come and count towards congregation numbers.

In class we talked about how although in society there are lots of
religions to choose from, the background of a person might prevent them
from choosing their favorite religion. For example, if someone was
raised in a fairly restrictive church, and grew up thinking that way, it
is likely that they will stay within that church. They simply do know
enough about other religions to make a choice. This makes me think of
complex systems, and the general problem in economics of information
flow. The general assumption of perfect information is clearly too
idealistic; what happens when consumers don't know that on the other
side of town you can get the car for much cheaper? Joshua Epstein and
Robert Axtell's Growing Articial Societies deals with this a bit. I
actually reconstructed their models for a project last quarter, and
their conclusion is that while the market does head towards equilibrium
price, it takes time. Through in changing preferences and difference in
taste between generations, then the economic equilibrium is almost never
reached at all. What does this say about religion? Well, there's
probably people who would join a church if they required less ("dead
weight loss"); people will probably keep changing churches; a single
church won't dominate the entire religious market... You get the idea.

The last "map" I will make, although this is not so much a map as a
"reminds me of", is to psychology. Smith suggests that with the large
number of religious choices in society, people are more likely to find
one they like and commit to it. Psychology, however, suggests otherwise.
Sheena S. Iyengar and Mark R. Lepper has written papers on how people
are more likely to buy jam if given 6 choices instead of 60. This
[NYTimes article](http://www.columbia.edu/%7Ess957/nytimes.html) gives a
non-technical overview. While this does not invalidate Smith's theory,
more research should perhaps be done on choice between religions.

For those who find domain mapping a valuable tool, it might be
interesting to you that these metaphors - which are what maps are when
you explain them - have been considered by some (in particular, [George
Lakoff](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/George_Lakoff)) to be the basis of
how we learn. The metaphors also suggest certain attitudes. I used the
phrase "spend time" above, seeing time as money. Does that mean I look
at time as something I "own", that I should maximize my time, and
there's only a finite amount of it?

Lakoff's book Metaphors We Live By
([a](http://www.google.com/url?sa=t&source=web&ct=res&cd=2&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.amazon.com%2FMetaphors-We-Live-George-Lakoff%2Fdp%2F0226468011&ei=SvKNSfKNE4zgMLH7hIwL&usg=AFQjCNH_d8Y3m2eui9cOEK4tW_lBhXONhw&sig2=WPLomon9-lWxn4imLyaDVQ)/[bn](http://search.barnesandnoble.com/Metaphors-We-Live-By/George-Lakoff/e/9780226468013))
will probably give more details on this. I have yet to read the book
either; I would gladly read it with you and discuss.

