Title: Don't Shoot the Symptom
Date: 2013-11-27 19:12
Category: ifttt
Slug: dont-shoot-the-symptom

*The usual disclaimers about not seeing outside my life experience
apply.*

This is my last rant on social issues. I find it amusing that I feel
compelled to put the warning above, even though it's almost
tautological.

I saw the latest James Bond film
([Skyfall](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Skyfall)) several months back,
and was afterwards surprised to find that
[there's](http://bitchmagazine.org/post/draft-backlot-bitch-mr-bond-and-i)
[some](http://reverttosaved.com/2012/11/17/skyfall-james-bonds-return-to-male-gaze-misogyny/)
[backlash](http://exiledstardust.wordpress.com/2012/11/02/women-the-makers-of-skyfall-hate-you/)
on the blogosphere. Not because the film was badly made - most critics
praised the cinematography - but because the women in the film were
disposable Specifically (spoiler alert):

-   Bond seduces the sex slave Severine, with full knowledge of her past
-   Bond fails to save Severine due to bad shooting, despite a minute
    later overcoming his captors
-   M (played by Judi Dench) is killed, and is replaced by a man
-   Moneypenny is reduced from an active agent to a desk job

Now, these things (especially the first one) are certainly bad things to
portray, but I wonder how out of the ordinary they are. That is, because
the film is a work of fiction but set in a close-to-real world, these
events in themselves may not be misogynistic, although the *selection*
of their portrayal might be.

Let me try to make this idea more clear. The events in a work of
fiction, which is set in the real world, could be *representative* while
still being misogynistic. We could, for example, write a fictional book
with the vilest, most sexist human trafficker as the protagonist, and
have them get away scot-free at the end. The events and characters in
such a novel would certainly be misogynistic, but they would also be
realistic (as in, such people exist in the world). The question is, is
the work as a whole misogynistic?

I think the underlying question - which applies not just to feminism,
but also to heteronormativity, stereotypes, and so on - is the act of
criticizing people for being realistic. Back to Skyfall, [27% of senior
positions](http://www.cnn.com/2010/POLITICS/08/09/woman.intel.chief/) in
six US intelligence agencies are held by women; [22 of the Fortune 500
companies](http://management.fortune.cnn.com/2013/05/09/women-ceos-fortune-500/)
have female CEOs. That is, if the writers of Skyfall had wanted to
determine, at random, whether the new M should be male or female if the
statistics of reality were followed, three out of four times the new M
would still be male. The other portrayals are less defendable, although
again there is a question of whether it was unrealistic.

Moving outside of fiction, complaining about realistic sentiments is
actually quite common. I caught myself doing it for a couple weeks, when
I noticed how infrequently the [asexual
perspective](http://justinnhli.com/posts/2013/11/asexuality.html) is
brought up. I was started to get annoyed at this, until I remembered
that asexuality represents [maybe
1%](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Asexuality#Prevalence) of the
population. Even if this is an underestimate, sexual people are still in
the vast majority, and I should not expect to find the two be
represented equally frequently.

This asexuality example is not particularly compelling one, but other,
less politically-correct examples are everywhere. One such case is the
struggle between meritocracy and equality in, for example higher
education (this is [also an issue for Silicon
Valley](http://www.newyorker.com/reporting/2013/05/27/130527fa_fact_packer?currentPage=all)).
In the ideal world, universities would like to select their students
purely on the basis of their academic achievements. The problem is that,
since education opportunities are not equally given to everyone, those
with the most "merit" tend to be Caucasian and, to a lesser extent,
Asian. This means that if we attempt to continue with meritocracy, the
student population at the most prestigious universities will no longer
resemble the demographics of the country at large. Note that this is not
due to the universities being *actively* discriminatory, but that as a
result of societal/structure issues, the *result* is a discriminatory
one. For universities, the solution is often to ignore pure meritocracy
and instead accept students based on a mix of merit and equality.
Silicon Valley, on the other hand, has no pressure to make this change,
and as a result has [increased the economic
inequity](http://www.weeklystandard.com/articles/silicon-chasm_768037.html?nopager=1)
in the Bay area.

Here's an even more contentious example. ["In 2008, the [homicide]
offending rate for blacks (24.7) offenders per 100,000) was 7 times
higher than the rate for whites (3.4 per
100,000)."](http://www.bjs.gov/content/pub/pdf/htus8008.pdf) If we take
this seriously, that means all else being equal, the black person you
just walked pass is seven times more likely to be a murder than the
white person you just walked pass. If we were to take precautions
against murder based on the [estimated
likelihood](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bayesian_inference) of being
the victim of an attempted murder, we should be more cautious when
around a black stranger. But this is, of course, entirely inappropriate
(and possibly unethical); as with the meritocracy case, the resulting
action is discriminatory even if the logic that led to it, and the
statistics that the logic is based on, are both sound.

I could continue to list examples, but instead I'll highlight the
lesson. The point here is not that we should stop caring about these
issues, but that we need to separate the realistic reaction to an
undesirable circumstance, from the undesirable circumstance itself.
Sometimes these are not separable - the reaction may itself further
perpetuate the circumstance (think victim blaming and rape culture) -
but often the reaction is merely a symptom of the underlying problem.
This is especially important for people who want to fix the undesirable
circumstance, as removing the reaction would not solve the problem. For
everyone else, separating the symptom from the cause will maybe help
quell your frustration.

