Title: Education and Games
Date: 2009-07-24 02:20
Author: justinnhli
Slug: education-and-games

I'm in the middle of CTY, and I'm having a grand time. If I come back
next year, I'll be back as an instructor. The future's not certain
though, and there are several factors preventing me from coming back.
First, CTY fits Northwestern's schedule really well - we end mid-June,
then I have a week before CTY starts. UMich though ends mid-May, which
means CTY cuts my summer in half. ThatÂ  means it's harder to get things,
and I can't just start research later during the summer - I'll have to
start it, stop for a few weeks, then go back to it. Of course, the whole
research thing will probably be the main competitor for my time. I
really wish I could come back though; I'll have to talk to my advisor
about it.

Anyway, this post isn't about my 2010 summer plans. I started off saying
that I want to be back as an instructor because I was thinking about
ways to improve the course. While the course as it stands is pretty
good, there are several things which bugs me. For example, the pre and
post tests are almost irrelevant to the course material; I'm sure I can
think of some better questions which deals with breaking goals into
steps, or how information travels through a program, or how to build
sturdy objects.

One thing that my instructor did, and which I like a lot, is the focus
on not only robots, but on design as well. Before each big project, we
have the kids fill out design documents, so they have to think through
what their problem is, and how their robot will solve that problem.
Right now though, the design templates are very heavily physical. There
is no room to do some good thinking about the program, where as there's
an area for a sketch of the robot. I would totally redesign the design
sheet, so the hardware and software components are given enough time. I
also think there's some space for more reflective questions; for
example, start off by asking the kids what they think will be hard, then
afterwards asking them whether they predicted correctly, and if not,
what was harder than expected and why.

All this led to thoughts of flow charts, which I know the other robotics
class do. We never teach the kids flowcharts, although I learned that
some earlier iterations of the class do have that in the curriculum. The
main problem, I think, is that we don't deal with branches and loops
until Thursday, and by then it's a little late to start adding flow
charts to the design process, especially if they've already filled out
several of those sheets. One option, I guess, is to move the branches
and loops lesson to earlier in the week. My only qualm with that is how
comfortable the kids will be with that material that early. And besides,
flow charts don't work very well with variables anyway (as a side note,
is there any kind of diagram allows the diagrammer to keep track of
variables over time?).

So I was thinking about flow charts, and how to best structure the class
so kids can learn more abstract concepts, when I found myself wondering
how video games have tutorials which slowly guide the player to more
advanced skills. The tutorials have to start off easy, get progressively
harder, but at the same time must remain fun for the whole time. And
isn't that exactly what we want to do at CTY? Yes we're cramming a lot
of material into the kids' brains, but it's also supposed to be fun. In
this sense, I liked what one of my other instructors did; he had a theme
of the students being robot builders throughout the course, and told
them that at the end they'll be "little
[Gorts](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gort_%28The_Day_the_Earth_Stood_Still%29)".
This is in essence a "leveling system", so the kids feel like they've
accomplished something.

But really, I think game designers should talk to educators more, so
kids are learning more but remain engaged.

