Title: Effing the Ineffable
Date: 2013-09-12 01:57
Author: justinnhli
Slug: effing-the-ineffable

I think it’s interesting that language, despite it being a powerful way
of communication, cannot express a lot of things.

To use a cliched example, language cannot express what love is. People
resort to saying, [“No one needs to tell you you are in love, you just
know it, through and
through.”](http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0133093/quotes?item=qt0324318)
Same with art, which people can only know it when they see it (or
[obscenity](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/I_know_it_when_I_see_it)).

That’s not the same as saying that language cannot lead to such things.
We may not be able to describe love, but we can tell stories about it,
and depend on our [shared neuron
structure](http://justinnhli.blogspot.com/2013/05/reflection-on-wittgenstein.html)
for the reader to get in the character’s shoes. More indirectly,
language can express instructions that leads to the reader to have
unexpressable feelings. We may not be able to [tell someone how to be
effortless](http://justinnhli.blogspot.com/2013/08/unteachables.html) or
be spontaneous, but we can tell them to do things that will eventually
lead them to be effortless or spontaneous.

Buddhist [koans](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Koan) are, in theory,
exactly this, another level down. Language cannot express what
enlightenment is. It can’t even describe the process of attaining
enlightenment in any useful way. Instead, koans try to make you think
differently by [denying its normal way of
thinking](http://www.catb.org/jargon/html/K/koan.html). The reader is
supposed to then think on the koan and, eventually, adopt the requisite
state of mind. In a sense, a koan describes the shape of unexpressable
directions that lead to unexpressable states of mind.

All in all, it’s amazing that we can induce patterns of thought in other
people, even for things that language fail to describe. Maybe, this is
why sometimes a passage appears vague and unclear to us; maybe it’s not
that the author is doing a bad job, but that language itself is
incapable of expressing what the author wants to say.

PS. The title of this post is, of course,
[paraphrased](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ineffability#Notable_quotations)
from Douglas Adams.

