Title: Egyptian Heaven
Date: 2008-02-02 03:46
Slug: egyptian-heaven

I just finished watching The Bucket List, starring Morgan Freeman and
Jack Nicholson. Interested readers can check out the [Wikpedia
page](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Bucket_List); although the ending
is revealed, I don't think it will ruin the movie experience. It's one
of the "it's the journey" things.

I particularly liked the part on the pyramid when Freeman's character
tells Nicholson's character about Egyptian heaven. He said that in the
myth in Egypt is that when you die, you are admitted to heaven based on
your answers to two questions: "Have you had joy in your life?" and "Has
your life given joy to others?" It's incorrectness aside (I was under
the impression that Anubis weighed your soul against a feather... heart,
according to Wikipedia), I actually quited liked the two questions.

Have I had joy in my life? Yes! I enjoy life very much. I cannot say
anything about having the most joy, or if I will still be joyful when
I'm looking death in the face, but I have definitely lived a pretty good
life so far.

Has my life given joy to others? Nicholson's character had initially
tried to dodge this question, telling Freeman's character not to ask
him, but ask them. However, I think part of the power of this question
is how its forcing you to be introspective. My life? As an optimistic
and slightly narcissistic person, I would say yes. At least, I hope so.
I have made people laugh, not like "solved world hunger" or "cured
cancer", but mostly small things. I certainly enjoy small jokes and
short quiet moments a lot. I wish I could share that joy.

