Title: Favourite Wikipedia Page
Date: 2008-04-10 23:58
Author: justinnhli
Slug: favourite-wikipedia-page

We all know that Wikipedia can be distracting at times, but never has it
entertained me as much as today when I read the pages on punctuation. I
don't even remember how I got to those pages (I think I was looking up
Asterisk the telephony system). But those pages are hilarious.

Here are a few of my favourite parts:

<span style="font-weight:bold;">Apostrophe:</span>

...

Kingsley Amis, on being challenged to produce a sentence whose meaning
depended on a possessive apostrophe, came up with:

-   Those things over there are my husband's. (*Those things over there
    belong to my husband*.)
-   Those things over there are my husbands. (*I'm married to those men
    over there.*)

...

Apostrophes used incorrectly to form plurals are known as *greengrocers'
apostrophes* (or *grocers' apostrophes*, or sometimes humorously
*greengrocers apostrophe's*).

...

<span style="font-weight:bold;">Parentheses:</span>

...

Parentheses may also be nested (with one set (such as this) inside
another set). This is not commonly used in formal writing (though
sometimes other brackets [especially square brackets] will be used for
one or more inner set of parentheses [in other words, *secondary* {or
even *tertiary*} phrases can be found within the main sentence]).

...

<span style="font-weight:bold;">Square Brackets:</span>

...

The bracketed expression [sic] is used to indicate errors that are "thus
in the original"; a bracketed ellipsis [...] is often used to indicate
deleted material; bracketed comments indicate when original text has
been modified for clarity: "I'd like to thank [several unimportant
people] and my parentals [*sic*] for their love, tolerance [...] and
*assistance* [*italics added*]".

...

Square brackets are also used as parentheses within parentheses
(alternating between parentheses and square brackets as nesting gets
deeper [despite the alternative use of curly braces for this purpose (as
mentioned earlier)]).

...

<span style="font-weight:bold;">Curly Brackets:</span>

...

Curly brackets are often used in internet communities and through
instant messaging to indicate hugging.

...

<span style="font-weight:bold;">Colon:</span>

...

It also has the widespread usage of representing two vertically aligned
eyes in a emoticon, such as :-), :), :(, :P, :D, :O, etc.

<span style="font-weight:bold;">Ellipsis:</span>

...

The use of ellipses can either mislead or clarify, and the reader must
rely on the good intentions of the writer who uses it. An example of
this ambiguity is 'She went to... school.' In this sentence, '...' might
represent the word 'elementary', or the word 'no'.

...

In Perl6, the 3-character ellipsis is also known as the "yadda yadda
yadda" operator...

...

<span style="font-weight:bold;">Exclamation Mark:</span>

...

The English town of Westward Ho!, named after the novel by Charles
Kingsley, is the only place name in the United Kingdom that officially
contains an exclamation mark. There is a town in Quebec called
Saint-Louis-du-Ha! Ha!, which officially contains two exclamation marks
in its name.

...

In recent Internet culture, especially where leet is used, an excessive
way of expressing exclamation in text is seen as *!!!!!!111*. This
notation originates from the eagerness to add multiple exclamation marks
but failing to hit the shift key combination properly. Later this
behavior has evolved into a sign of recognition for certain Internet
cultures who now intentionally add *1*s after their expressions either
to ridicule people who do it without purpose or as a sign of recognition
towards others who also are familiar with the behavior. As a further pun
to this development of linguistics, some add literal *one*s such as
*!!!!!one!11* to explicitly state that their use of *1*s was
intentionally typed, since *one* is fairly unlikely to be typed by
accident.

...

British English, a **(!)** symbol (an exclamation mark within
parentheses) implies that a character has made an obviously sarcastic
comment eg: "*Ooh, a sarcasm detector. Oh, that's a* really useful
*invention.(!)*"<span
title="This claim needs references to reliable sources since January 2007"
style="white-space:nowrap;"></span>

...

<span style="font-weight:bold;">Quotation Marks:</span>

...

Sometimes, quotations are nested in more levels than inner and outer
quotation. Nesting levels up to five can be found in the Bible.^[2]^ In
these cases, questions arise about the form (and names) of the quotation
marks to be used. The most common way is to simply alternate between the
two forms^<span
title="This claim needs references to reliable sources since September 2007"
style="white-space:nowrap;">[*citation\\ needed*]</span>^, thus:

<dl>
<dd>
"...'..."...' ... ... '..."...'..."

</dd>
</dl>
If such a passage is further quoted in another publication, then all of
their forms have to be shifted over by one level.

...

A three-way distinction is occasionally made between normal use of a
word (no quotation marks), referring to the concept behind the word
(single quotation marks), and the word itself (double quotation marks):

<dl>
<dd>
When discussing 'use', use "use".

</dd>
</dl>
...

<span style="font-weight:bold;">Slash:</span>

...

The Slash is also the symbol for a wand in NetHack.

...

<span style="font-weight:bold;">Ampersand:</span>

...

Perhaps due to its increasing rarity, the ampersand is sometimes
rendered incorrectly when drawn by hand. The most common error is to
render the symbol backwards [1]. Another mistake that is sometimes made
is to draw it as a treble clef from musical notation.

...

<span style="font-weight:bold;">Asterisk:</span>

...

In the Common Lisp programming language, the names of global variables
are conventionally set off with asterisks, `*LIKE-THIS*`.

...

<span style="font-weight:bold;">Caret:</span>

...

The caret is also a common text emoticon used in a pair to resemble
Anime eyes (\^\^).

...

