Title: Google as a Social Force
Date: 2010-01-13 03:49
Author: justinnhli
Slug: google-as-a-social-force

Google has increasingly been involved in social and political issues,
not just in the US but around the world. Most of you are familiar with
the criticism of Google on their privacy policy, with their ability to
identify so many people (Google has over [844 million unique visitors
per
month](http://www.techcrunch.com/2009/08/04/facebook-is-now-the-fourth-largest-site-in-the-world/)).
A less familiar issue is the problem of network neutrality, or whether
internet providers can charge more for people accessing certain sites.
Google is part of the [Open Internet
Coalition](http://www.openinternetcoalition.com/index.cfm?objectid=0016502C-F1F6-6035-B1264DD29499E9D0)
which is against ISP filtering. However, [questions have been
raised](http://arstechnica.com/tech-policy/news/2009/10/after-net-neutrality-will-we-need-google-neutrality.ars)
as to whether laws should be enacted to make Google content neutral as
well.

The latest in Google's involvement in politics is in China. When Google
first went into the Chinese market, it complied with government laws
about censoring, so that websites about Falun Gong, about criticism of
the communist government, etc. would not be listed on Google's search
results. Google recently published a [blog
post](http://googleblog.blogspot.com/2010/01/new-approach-to-china.html)
talking about a recent attack on Google's services, specifically to get
information from accounts of known activists. The post itself does not
name the hackers, but as the later part of the post mentions its China
policy, it is implied that the hackers work for the Chinese government.

What is particularly interesting about this latest development is that
Google, as a business, could have done nothing. Certainly, the attacks
should result in increased security measures, but there is no reason for
Google to change its China policy. Google earns money mostly from ad
revenue, and the more eyeballs an ad gets, the more money Google makes.
Google's Chinese site directs a nation of 1.3 billion people to its ads,
so if the purpose of a business is to increase profits, Google should
keep their Chinese portal open.

That Google is reviewing its China policy, to the extent of considering
closing down Google China, is good news. The company with the motto of
"Don't be Evil" is touching a lot of legal spheres: freedom of access to
information, freedom of speech, copyright... What Google, and
increasingly other international companies, decide to do in the face of
local government pressure may send a strong signal to the global
community.

It is not just that these companies have global reach, but that
increasingly the problems one country faces cannot be solved without the
participation of other countries. China, without the international
scrutiny, would likely increase their censorship. With the recent
disastrous Copenhagen talks on climate change, we need companies to put
aside short term interests, and consider the effects of their actions on
the world as a whole.

In an age where companies have more income than entire developed
nations, we need to question what obligations they should have.

EDIT: Ars Technica [article about Google's blog
post](http://arstechnica.com/tech-policy/news/2010/01/furious-google-throws-down-gauntlet-to-china-over-censorship.ars).

