Title: Greyhound Tales
Date: 2008-06-28 13:30
Slug: greyhound-tales

Hello! I'm at Stanford, California! It's kind of amazing that I'm all
the way on the other side of the country. I haven't writing anything for
a while, because I was busy and also because I didn't get my <span
id="SPELLING_ERROR_0" class="blsp-spelling-error">internet</span>
connection set up until yesterday. I won't talk about Stanford/<span
id="SPELLING_ERROR_1" class="blsp-spelling-error">CTY</span> stuff for
now, because I have a few stories to tell about my cross-country
journal.

I told a number of people that I would be taking the train over here.
However, my Amtrak plans were <span
style="font-style:italic;">derailed</span> by the flooding in Iowa,
which made it necessary for me to travel by Greyhound instead. It was
what people call an experience; I wouldn't do it again, but for what it
was worth it was eye opening.

For one, the passengers were mostly from middle-lower class, as compared
to my usual travels in airports. Through out the trip I was a little
afraid to bring out my laptop, because it might show that I'm not of the
same background. There was only one person I saw with a laptop, at the
layover in Kansas City. Only when I got into California, and was going
between major cities there, did I see people with more advanced
gadgetry, like an iPhone/<span id="SPELLING_ERROR_2"
class="blsp-spelling-error">iPod</span> Touch. That said, the people on
the buses are not bad people, they're just less intellectual and
slightly more vulgar. They are people with less fortunate lives,
although that doesn't mean they're not happy. I thought about the
representation of homeless people in video games for a bit, but I
realized that some of these people more closely resembled our white
water rafting guide over spring break; probably enjoyed life at some
point, but it wasn't glorious or clean in any way.

Having spent 54 hours on a bus with these people, I do have a few
stories to tell though:

The person I talked to the most on this trip was Andrew. His journey
started in Upper Peninsula, Michigan and ended in Reno, Nevada, which
took him into Chicago and all the way along my route. He had longish
hair, an inch above his shoulders, and he always has a University of
Michigan cap on. He was young, high school or college freshman age. My
first impression of him was not that good, but it wasn't his manner so
much as his conversation material. In fact, my thinking was, "why are
you telling me this?" Although he gave less detail, our first
conversation contained essentially the same story as I eventually found
out. Andrew (which I read from his luggage tag first, before we shook
hands and introduced ourselves before we part ways) was moving to Reno,
because his was-girlfriend-now-fiancee has a kid. He didn't know until 4
months ago, because she never told him. They met in September of 2006,
in a <span id="SPELLING_ERROR_3"
class="blsp-spelling-error">Walmart</span> of all places. One thing led
to another, and they ended having sex... which also makes that date the
conception date of their kid. They knew the condom broke, which is why
they're in this situation now. The girl left, and they didn't
communicate until they found each other's <span id="SPELLING_ERROR_4"
class="blsp-spelling-error">MySpace</span>. The girl is from Reno, which
is why he's going there, even though he has not been there before.
Andrew has family, of course, but he doesn't think too highly of them;
his mother (he never even mentioned his father) neglects him, and he has
several siblings, including a brother who is violent. Before he got the
news he had a \$40,000 football scholarship to University of Michigan,
but while moving something he broke his thumb, which evaporated his
chances of getting the scholarship. Not surprisingly, he had wanted to
be a football player before that. What is surprising was that he now
wants to be an author. It's possible: he's 18 years old, and his fiancee
still lives with her parents, whom he has never met. After knowing all
this, I'm not sure what to think of him. On one hand he is stupid for
letting this happen. I don't like how casually he tells people this, as
though he wasn't taking it seriously. Although, I feel like he really
does care for the girl. Considering that he's marrying her, that he's
giving up his (<span id="SPELLING_ERROR_5"
class="blsp-spelling-corrected">albeit</span> abysmal) life to move to
Reno. His choice of words when talking tell the latter story, of how
he's lucky he found a significant other, and how he will "make love" to
her when he gets to Reno.

Most of the people are like this on the bus: not good, but deserving of
sympathy. The few other people on the bus I know less detailed stories
of:

There was an old guy from Dayton, Ohio, who had lived there for most of
47 years. I heard the story in the dark, so I'm not sure who it was, but
I think he got off in Reno as well. <span id="SPELLING_ERROR_6"
class="blsp-spelling-corrected">Where ever</span> he was going, he had a
business proposal waiting for him there: ghost hunting, at "the most
haunted building" in the world. He has a meeting with "tuxedo execs" the
day after he arrives, and if everything goes well, he and his partner
will get exclusive rights to that haunted hotel.

There's another youngster, this one around my age, whose travels started
in <span id="SPELLING_ERROR_7"
class="blsp-spelling-error">Gainesville</span>, Georgia. He was taking
the bus to Hays, Kansas, before flying to California to find his mother
and siblings. From there he's driving them out to Georgia, before
returning the truck in California and finally flying back to his Georgia
home. He painted life in his California town to be violent, and to
another guy who has been in his neighborhood he said, "you'd better
shoot first and ask later, because they damn sure are gonna do the same
to you."

There are a couple other people:

-   a guy who has post <span id="SPELLING_ERROR_8"
    class="blsp-spelling-error">anterograde</span> amnesia, after a
    motorcycle accident. He chews tobacco, after his grandfather tried
    to warn him off it by letting him try when he was 3 years old. There
    was a running joke that he likes trees, and every time we stop for
    breaks he says, "<span id="SPELLING_ERROR_9"
    class="blsp-spelling-error">There're</span> trees! I'm good."
-   There was a pair of siblings Craig and Lindsey, together with
    girlfriend Emily. Craig was older than Lindsey by at least 15 years,
    which made the trio stand out. At first I thought Lindsey was their
    kid, but found that wasn't the case after a little eavesdropping. I
    only talked to Lindsey, while the other two were outside on a smoke
    break. There were from Culver, Indiana and were going to Oregon for
    unknown business. She was a nice kid, but I don't like the
    environment she's growing up in. They had met a Mexican kid, Roger,
    on the trip, and Craig and Roger spent part of the ride from Chicago
    to Denver verbally "<span id="SPELLING_ERROR_10"
    class="blsp-spelling-corrected">harassing</span>" a pair of girls.
-   The pair of girls were from Kazakhstan, as one of their shirt says,
    and have never been to the States before. The two guys tried hard to
    tell then what's great about America, focusing mostly on the variety
    of fast food available. I don't know where the girls were off to,
    but they were here to be maids - strange. The <span
    id="SPELLING_ERROR_11"
    class="blsp-spelling-error">Kazakhstanis</span> were not the only
    pair of girls I met.
-   There was another pair on the ride from Salt Lake City to San
    Francisco, who spoke to each other rapidly in a foreign language. It
    wasn't Spanish or French, and it sounded eastern European to me,
    perhaps Bulgarian or Romanian.
-   Finally, there were another pair of foreign girls at the San
    Francisco station, booking or changing their tickets. They looked
    closer to the <span id="SPELLING_ERROR_12"
    class="blsp-spelling-error">Kazakhstanis</span> than the Europeans,
    but I didn't study them as deeply.

I think the stories are quite something to listen to, but I feel
different knowing that I've met these people, and it's not just fiction
from the imagination of an author.

Pun Count: 1

