Title: Hello from Stanford
Date: 2008-07-06 07:49
Author: justinnhli
Slug: hello-from-stanford

Hello!

I haven't written for a while, and I haven't written anything at all
about my experience at Stanford and teaching. Classes formally started
this past Monday, but of course I had to work with my instructor
beforehand to plan the lessons and refresh the materials in my mind. By
"refresh" I mean "learn"; neither of us have done anything with LEGO
Mindstorms in the past several years, and I personally haven't even
touched a Brick since 7th grade. Classes are a lot of fun, but also
really tiring, considering breakfast is at 07:30, that classes go from
09:00 till 16:30, and we still have to do more planning after that. This
ridiculous (in the good sense) schedule is why I haven't written much,
both in my journal and on this blog. Of course, the mile long walk
between my residence and the dining hall and classroom, the beautiful
Stanford campus and the unchanging California sunshine doesn't help my
case at all. It is a nice change from the cold and occasional
thunderstorm in Chicago though.

I'm not really supposed to write about CTY classes and my experience in
public, so these posts will remain relatively short. I will say one
thing though: CTY is amazing not just because of the location and the
brilliant kids, but because the whole program is filled with peple like
myself. From the administrators, to the instructors, the TAs, all the
way to the students; everyone is excited about leraning, about the
things they do. I feel there is a tangible passion for knowledge, for
the spreading of knowledge, but overarchingly for something bigger than
what each single individual can produce. It really does make me excited
and happy to be here.

That's all for now; I'll leave you with a small pun. While I was writing
the notes for my journal, I told a bee to go bug someone else. Heh.

