Title: Homo Universalis
Date: 2008-12-01 16:56
Author: justinnhli
Slug: homo-universalis

What do [Aristotle](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aristotle), [Leonardo
da Vinci](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Leonardo_da_Vinci), [Benjamin
Franklin](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Benjamin_Franklin), and [Richard
Feynman](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Richard_Feynman) have in common?
Aristotle, Franklin, and Feynman all made contributions to science (the
development of logic, lightning rods, and quantum mechanics), da Vinci
and Feynman are both artists (Mona Lisa, etc.; Feynman played bongo
drums), all of them were writers, Aristotle and Franklin were both
politicians.

They were all, in other words, polymaths and Renaissance men. I
personally like the term "homo universalis" better, if only because it
sounds cooler. According to
[Wikipedia](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Polymath), there *is* a
difference between the two. Polymaths are people who have achievements
in several fields, whereas Renaissance men are closer to an ideal,
someone who "develop[s] his capacities as fully as possible" both
mentally physically. Despite this meaning, I will use the term "homo
universalis" to symbolize what these men present, as "polymath"
sometimes has the negative connotation of a jack of all trades.

Aristotle, da Vinci, Franklin are all historical figures (Feynman died
in 1988). I would now like to risk ridicule by naming a few people I
know who are close to the ideal, although of course a lot less famous:

-   Sakshi Agarwal
-   Mark Bell
-   Stuart Harwood
-   William Stork

These people may not be experts in many different fields, but I feel
they truly appreciate a wide span of academic fields. There are a number
of other people who are interested in separate subjects in different
fields, but are not as enthused as these four. I'm certain some of you
reading this will question my judgment; I would love to have a
conversation with you about people we know and whether and how they homo
universalis.

It is not surprising for me to say, after this long an introduction,
that I want to be a Renaissance man. This thought came up very strongly
as I was writing my statement of purpose, and had to choose a field to
elaborate on why it's important and why I want to study it. I've already
mentioned my difficulty choosing between complex systems and symbolic
learning, but in truth it's much more than that. Four years ago when I
was applying to colleges for undergrad I already knew I was majoring in
computer science, but I thought about getting a minor or a second major.
I've seriously considered philosophy, mathematics, physics, psychology,
and cognitive science, and although I didn't end up doing any of them,
I've taken extra classes in all but physics. What I *am* getting is a
certificate in engineering design, which is what my
[portfolio](http://dl.getdropbox.com/u/316654/portfolio.pdf)is for. I
have done [some](http://justinnhli.deviantart.com/)
[art](http://picasaweb.google.com/justinnhli), although it's clearly
inferior to a lot of [other](http://jrscheung.deviantart.com/)
[people](http://jihepengphotography.com/)'s. Of course I need more work
in the physical sciences as well as maths, but I definitely need the
most work in politics and history, as well as classic literature.

Now that I'm done selling myself to you, I want to point out that from
the large number of historical figures, I've only listed four.
Similarly, from the many people I've gotten to know, I've also only
listed four people. The truth is that homo universalis is few and far
between, especially in the modern age when even single fields branch
into numerous subfields. In Ancient Greece being a Renaissance man was a
lot easier (apart from traveling into the future to be named a
*Renaissance* man). Pythagoras believed that numbers were key to
understanding God, and since mathematics was invariably linked to
engineering and architecture, mastering mathematics already combines a
large number of fields. Of course, during the Enlightenment, people like
da Vinci were much more impressive; there was enough branching in human
knowledge to so people have to work hard to be experts, but not so much
branching that it's impossible to know everything.

Nowadays though, it's much harder to be a homo universalis. There are
simply too many fields, and they require too much preparation, to excel
at several at the same time. Just within computer science you can do
research in knowledge bases, in human computer interaction, in machine
learning, in information retrieval. The last can be further broken down
in by method, say, linguistics or statistics. In the case of a
linguistics approach to information retrieval, what you're studying is
arguably an intersection between computer science, linguistics,
sociology, and some statistics. This means to master IR, you need to
study all four subjects, although only the aspects pertaining to IR.
This in turn means, however, that what linguistics you know will not
apply to, say, human language acquisition. Even within linguistics, as
within all other fields, we specialize for depth while sacrificing
breadth.

This is all summarized in the saying, "[in academics research] one
learns more and more about less and less until one knows everything
about nothing."

There is a problem with this kind of dissection of a topic. While it's
true that IR is at the intersection of four or more fields, topics worth
studying are not all like this. I think there are more interesting
things when they are not so much inter-disciplinary (between displines)
as multi-disciplinary (including several disciplines. Here are two
questions which I think fit this nature:

-   What is intelligence and how do humans attain it?
-   What is life and how did it start?

There's a lot of philosophy in these questions, such as whether animals
are intelligent or whether life is restricted to physical constructs.
The first emcompases a large portion of cognitive science, neurology,
artificial intelligence, as well as a smaller portion of fields like
biology and chemistry. It would be much more interesting if the
education system focused not on a discipline, but a question, and the
goal of your school is to understand what the question is really asking,
and learn subjects which aid in finding the answer.

Here is something I want to address: education. While I admit that
today's fields are too diverse and too technical to be an expert at even
several of them, I think something can be done at the education level to
encourage the development of homo universalis qualities. The Chinese
education system, as far as I understand, requires massive memorization
of facts, which without the ability to use them is pointless. The
British education system, on the other hand, asks students to pick
broadly between sciences and literature in secondary chool. At the
university level, they declare their majors when they apply, and have
one curriculum with relatively few electives. In the US, there is more
freedom in choosing what classes in high school, and are generally not
required to pick a major until the second year of college. There are
also the "liberal arts" colleges, where education aims for "imparting
general knowledge and developing intellectual capabilities".

But I don't think any of these are the answer. None of these systems
encourage the integration of different subjects, nor the development of
interests within each field. The first is not within the definition of a
universal man, but it is certainly an important part of excelling in any
field. The second, however, is I think the greater sin. Required as one
might be to take courses in different subjects, the prevalent attitude
is to do the course for requirement's sake. Instead, I think education
should focus on the student's curiosity. There has to be something that
they want to know: if not how life started on earth, then how to more
accurately predict baseball results.

It would be interesting, therefore, to see a curriculum like this. The
first day of class, students write down what things they want to know,
questions about the world. It can be related to anything, but they must
write something down. The actual teaching material will then be
determined from this list. I know this is infeasible, as it requires too
much individual attention, and much more work on the teachers part.
There's also the problem of some students writing things down which are
really narrow. However, I think this will help develop students to be
much more interested in the world, and for the kid who asks the right
questions, really give them the chance to master the different fields.

That last part was really incoherent. In reality, questions like those I
listed are almost impossible for any single person to answer, and so the
homo universalis in the current age becomes labora universalis. In
pursuit of being a better educated individual though, I suggest the
following:

-   Read! Read good newspapers, any non-fiction or literature book with
    a topic you find interesting. Magazines are good too, although it's
    much easier to pick the wrong ones.
-   Associate with smart people. It really does rub off - because they
    keep talking about smart things and exchanging ideas. They'll also
    help you get new ideas, and connect topics which you never think of.
-   Finally, write. Or more generally, produce. It's easy to say "I'm
    thinking" and leave it at that, but then you have no proof, and
    you'll eventually forget what you've thought about. It doesn't
    matter what the thought is; as long as you're thinking and being
    productive.

"Never let your schooling interfere with your education." - Mark Twain

Extra Reading:  
[How to Do What You Love - Paul
Graham](http://www.paulgraham.com/love.html)

