Title: I Miss CTY Bunches and Bunches
Date: 2008-12-14 14:21
Author: justinnhli
Slug: i-miss-cty-bunches-and-bunches

It's probably with grad school applications, and my parents talking
about graduation and summer plans, I've been thinking about this coming
summer a lot.

I suddenly miss CTY bunches and bunches.

At the end of the six weeks this past summer, I thought I had a good
time. I wondered, if I went back to Northwestern and facilitated for
GSW, whether I will get the same satisfaction from teaching college
freshman as with middle schoolers. The latter show so much more
enthusiasm for learning - but of course, I spend more time with them and
I know them better. But GSW never happened (because of lack of
enrollment), and I spent this quarter without teaching.

My introduction to Teach for America probably reawakened the teacher in
me. Adding to my confusion of what I want to do research in, I was
suddenly faced with the question of whether my broad interests makes me
better suited as a teacher than as a professor. Although I TA'ed one
subject for CTY, I am more free to talk about different topics, and draw
the students deeper into learning.

And then just now I found a tribute video to the Stanford CTY RAs, who
are planning a bay area reunion. I held myself the whole time, smiling
at the faces of people I haven't seen for 4 months, and wishing
fervently I was back at Stanford.

Even barring certain other memorable things, I still want to go back.

But this summer, Stanford's not offering the robotics program. CTY this
year, if I do it, will be with different people, at a different place.
It's not bad; it just won't be the same.

And right now, all I want is to be wind the clock back to July.

