Title: Importing Contacts with Gmail 1.5
Date: 2007-12-15 11:47
Author: justinnhli
Slug: importing-contacts-with-gmail-1-5

I finally figured out how to [import contacts into
Gmail](http://ninghui48.blogspot.com/2007/11/bugger-blog-2.html). I was
right about how the new version of Gmail exports and imports
incorrectly. Not only are the CSV files from the old version of Gmail
incompatible, but Gmail fails to import a file generated by the new
version of Gmail.

What I had to do instead was go back to the old version and do all the
importing there. The main difference between the old format and the new
format was the separator used; the new format uses the semicolon as the
separator between different entries in the same field (say, multiple
home email addresses), while the old version uses the string ' ::: '. It
was an easy thing for me to do a search and replace to convert my own
CSV file to Gmail format.

The funny thing is that I don't think my file works that well for the
old version either. If you look at an imported contact in the old
version, some of the information is moved to the notes section, meaning
Gmail doesn't really know what to do with it. Switching to the new
version, however, the contact is displayed correctly, with separate
email addresses and IM's and everything.

So, after figuring this out, I have to agree with a lot of commentators
on the web that the new version of Gmail still has a number of bugs. I
still use the new version as the default, but I'm also prepared for some
things to not work as well as in the old one.

