Title: In Defense of a Public Digital Life
Date: 2014-08-22 14:27
Slug: in-defense-of-a-public-digital-life

I am a private person, but you wouldn't know that from looking at my
online presence. I have a fairly active [Twitter
account](https://twitter.com/justinnhli/), which is entirely open to the
public. A lot of my tweets are
[inane](https://twitter.com/justinnhli/status/499999983685603328),
[sexual](https://twitter.com/justinnhli/status/500191303570042880),
often [potentially
offensive](https://twitter.com/justinnhli/status/472743073316077568) and
[trigger-warning-y](https://twitter.com/justinnhli/status/502487429321089024).
This content is also mirrored on Facebook, although on there it's
visible only to friends of friends. And, of course, I keep a blog, which
stretches back a good number of years and has covered the
[same](http://justinnhli.com/posts/2010/07/some-shit.html)
[range](http://justinnhli.com/posts/2013/11/mental-objectification.html)
[of](http://justinnhli.com/posts/2013/11/asexuality.html)
[topics](http://justinnhli.com/posts/2012/01/thoughts-on-cognitive-sport.html)
as my tweets, if about slightly more personal topics and in more words.

I am about to enter the job market and, despite common sense and advice,
am seriously considering keeping all this content online and public (and
searchable through my shared user name). I am well aware that employers
often look through applicant's social network activity to help get a
picture of them as a person, so this may lead to my unemployment later
down the road. But, I also have reasons for wanting these aspects of me
to be up, and I want to defend that here.

One reason is that I think we judge others in a biased way. Imagine you
are choosing between two people for a job as a high school teacher, A
and B, who are otherwise equally qualified. For A, you can find nothing
about them on Facebook - let's say it's because their privacy setting is
too high. For B, you can look through their profile, and in a couple of
minutes of browsing, you find a picture of them mugging for the camera
with a beer in each hand. Instinctively, what you want to think is
"Jeez, high school students are going to think this person's an
alcoholic, so let's hire the other person."

The problem with this conclusion is you haven't considered what you
*haven't seen*: given that this is Facebook, that there are no pictures
of B passed-out-drunk in their own vomit is probably a point in their
favor. More disturbing is that *you have seen no evidence about A
whatsoever*; you know strictly more about B than you know about A and
that B has a lower variance around what is normal Facebook behavior,
*and yet they were punished for giving you that information*. To make an
online dating analogy, this is like focusing on the fact that someone
likes My Little Pony and thereby deciding not to message them, when the
rest of their interests look compatible; but then turning around and
messaging someone who wrote very little on their profile, but has listed
no obvious clashes with your interests. (Raise your hand if you're
guilty; I am.)

There are several cognitive biases reflected in this example: [biased
selection](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Selection_bias) of information,
leading to the [availability
heuristic](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Availability_heuristic),
[neglecting the base
rate](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Base_rate_fallacy) of compromising
pictures on Facebook, and the [preference for risk
taking](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pseudocertainty_effect) when the
outcome is negative. The bottom line is that knowing more about a person
is a good thing (provided there are no, say, pictures of them abusing
animals), and all else being equal, the rational thing to do is to
choose what has a less chance of being bad ([or a higher chance of being
good](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Framing_effect_%28psychology%29)). I
want my online activity to stand as indicators of me as a person, and I
want this post to prove to the hiring committees that I'm smart and I
know what I'm doing and that they're biased in an undesirable way.

That's the somewhat snarky, condescending reason, but I have a more
idealistic and constructive reason as well.

As someone looking to go into teaching at the college-level, I believe
that the learning experience extends beyond the classroom. This is (one
of) the reason I'm hesitant about
[Udacity](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Udacity) and
[Cousera](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Coursera) and
[edX](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/EdX) and all the other [Massively
Open Online
Courses](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Massive_open_online_course)
(MOOCs). I think it's a good thing that people are putting course
material online, and that they are organized in ways that force
interaction and engagement, but if you ask me whether a student online
will learn as much as a student on a brick-and-mortar campus, given the
same level of instruction, I will say no, hands down. It wasn't until
recently (today, in fact) through a
[conversation](https://twitter.com/justinnhli/status/502296980744597504)
with a [friend](https://twitter.com/mclarkk) did I understand why: it's
because, deep down, I think that university education is more than about
the knowledge learned in a class, and even more than the relationships
you develop. It's about developing students into someone who enjoys, and
is still continually, learning.

And you can't teach that over the internet.

Well, no, you can, but not in hour-long videos one hour a week for
fourteen weeks and, I suspect, not even through seven years of irregular
blog posts. What I learned from that conversation is that I believe this
requires exposure to an atmosphere, a culture of learning. This means
that students need to feel the energy of people excited about things, to
have conversations with people only tangentially related to any course
topic, to ponder questions where not only the answer, but also the path
to that answer, is unknown. All these things are made exponentially
harder when conducted through the medium of text on an online forum,
especially not with teaching assistants whose focus is on answering
questions about the course material and nothing more. I would argue that
most of these things are not present even in physical classes, unless
the participants are willing to digress; most of the absorbing of
culture occurs in [third
places](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Third_place) around campus, and
requires a community open and dedicated to such exploration of topics.
And while there are education startups that try to create such an
environment - the company about which the
[article](http://www.theatlantic.com/features/archive/2014/08/the-future-of-college/375071/)
that started the conversation was written,
[Minerva](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Minerva_Schools_at_KGI),
physically co-locate their students - having a culture where such
learning is commonplace and expected is much harder to cultivate.

This is why I want to keep my tweets and my blog posts online and
public, because I think it is part of the culture of education. My
tweets may often be inane, but I think there is an undercurrent of
curiosity, and it serves as a reminder to be observant of the world - I
ask [questions of social
idioms](https://twitter.com/justinnhli/status/486126761432719363),
connect [ideas from disparate
fields](https://twitter.com/justinnhli/status/485512869371318272), and
comment [on the nature of
research](https://twitter.com/justinnhli/status/293220584433795072). The
very fact that I spend time writing short essays for my blog is evidence
that I spent personal time on (somewhat) academic pursuits. While I
wouldn't consider these things an essential part of my academic persona,
I do think it is a core part of who I am, as well as a part of the
culture that I want students to take part in. In the past, these tweets
and blog posts have led to interesting discussions with both friends and
students, and this is possible only because these artifacts are publicly
linked and searchable. To make my tweets private and to take down my
writings would mean losing this opportunity for conversation, and that
is something I do not want.

Perhaps it is arrogant of me to put such importance in my own
ramblings - more so for telling hiring committees that they're biased -
but I think, too, this gives a very concrete picture of who I am.

This is who I want my students to be, and it's worth the risk of being
judged if I can achieve that.

