Title: Into the Wild and The Game
Date: 2010-01-17 04:38
Author: justinnhli
Slug: into-the-wild-and-the-game

I finished two books recently, [Into the
Wild](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Into_the_Wild) and [The
Game](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Game:_Penetrating_the_Secret_Society_of_Pickup_Artists).
I haven't read much since grad school started, so it's nice to pick up
that habit again. I just want to say a few words about each book.

Into the Wild was an interesting read. The book was a little long for
the story - I'm not sure the parts about the author climbing the Devil's
Thumb was necessary - but it did bring out the interesting parts about
Chris. My overall reaction is that I can understand why Chris left on
this journey, although I wouldn't do it. I am persuaded by the author
that he knew what he was doing, and had only died because of bad luck. I
therefore have tremendous respect for the guy, for being able to survive
by himself, both in the fringes of civilization and in the "wilderness",
for so long.

The Game was also an interesting read. A lot of it was unnecessary
drama, but perhaps that was not surprising. I have seen parts of [The
Pickup
Artist](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Pickup_Artist_%28TV_series%29)
(it wasn't my idea), and it was interesting to know more background
about Mystery. As someone who doesn't believe in picking girls up, my
eye was more guided to what eventually happened to Neil Strauss. The
last paragraph of his acknowledges for Lisa was the most meaningful
paragraph to me.

My library copy only had one sentence underlined in the entire book:
"The secret to making someone think they're in love with you is to
occupy their thoughts, and that's what Lisa had done with me." It wasn't
even about picking people up.

My favorite quote from the book is "Never underestimate your capacity to
care", which I think says a lot about humans.

I hadn't intended it, but after finishing both books I find their
message is actually similar. Both Chris and Neil were unsatisfied with
their life somehow, and made moves to change it. At the end though,
after following other people's writings (whether they be Henry David
Thoreau or Mystery), what they find is not that their old life was
wrong, but that they never appreciated what they already had. Chris
wanted to go back to civilization and find comfort in people, while Neil
was in love with someone who likes his baldness and glasses.

I guess what I'm saying is being happy is both easier and harder than
you think.

