Title: Linux Apps
Date: 2007-09-17 17:19
Slug: linux-apps

I had the time to install a few more Linux apps on my laptop, to sort of
round out my system. These were all apps that I either lived without
before, or had a simpler app in its place.

The apps I installed were:

Rhythmbox

A music player inspired by iTunes. It's not quite as smooth as iTunes,
and doesn't have all the frills either, like cover flow or all that. It
does, however, beat my previous media players, which were alsaplayer,
wxvlc. alsaplayer is a really light weight player, and is the player I
use the most. wxvlc (Video Lan Player) is great for playing all kind of
different file types, and I have used it on occasion in Windows to play
Ogg Vorbis files.

What these lack, however, is a media library capability. I can't see all
my files at once, and there's no easy way to organize my songs. Since
I've moved all my stuff from the shared partition between Windows and
Linux (and I can't run iTunes with Wine), I need something to keep track
of my entire library. Hence, Rhythmbox.

Thunar

A file manager. For those unfamiliar with this term, it's the equivalent
of Finder in OS X and Windows Explorer in Windows. I never really needed
one, and to be honest I still don't need one. I use a terminal
(gnome-terminal) mostly, and can do all my stuff there with access to
the command line and everything. I don't really know why I installed
Thunar. It's kind of fun to do with graphical file managers again
though.

GnomeBaker

A CD/DVD burner. I'm trying to move further away from Windows, so this a
replacement for ImgBurn. Haven't tried it out yet, but I plan to use it
to burn an Ubuntu 7.04 install disc. Since I cleared my shared
partition, I'll be playing with Ubuntu once again.

Next I'll be tackling wireless and VPN problems on Arch. If Ubuntu have
those set up already, I'm hoping I can steal some configuration files to
help me out.

