Title: Marriage and the Society
Date: 2008-05-19 03:00
Author: justinnhli
Slug: marriage-and-the-society

One of [the](http://www.mercurynews.com/breakingnews/ci_9269719)
[headlines](http://www.nytimes.com/2008/05/16/us/16marriage.html?pagewanted=all)
over the past couple of days has been the overthrowing of the ban on
same-sex marriage in California. The news made several of my friends
gay; they were so jubilant I noticed a mass change in <span
id="SPELLING_ERROR_0" class="blsp-spelling-error">Facebook</span> status
about the event. Not unexpectedly, however, there was also a [lot of
outcry](http://www.nytimes.com/2008/05/18/us/18gay.html) about the
decision. I was thinking about all this, and here are some of my
thoughts.

My first question was, why is marriage important to people? All this
struggle in California indicates that marriage is an issue we care a lot
about, but it is not obvious why we care so much about it. For the LGBT
community, the issue has as much to to with social equality as marriage.
Marriage, they claim, is a universal human right and therefore should
apply to everyone, regardless of sexual orientation. However, it remains
that people want to get married, and that they view marriage as
something special.

I was talking to my friend (a Christian) the other day, and I asked him,
"why is marriage important in the Christian tradition?" His answer, and
from what I could learn on <span id="SPELLING_ERROR_1"
class="blsp-spelling-error">Wikipedia</span> (which in fact [offers very
little](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marriage#Marriage_and_religion) in
this area), were essentially that it is somehow recommended. The level
of "recommendation" is different for different denominations; while some
view it as optional, others consider it a sacrament and a duty. Since it
is important to multiply and have children, and since one should be
married before having children, marriage becomes a necessity.

It might seem strange to you that when I talked about reasons to get
married, I would talk about religion. The reason I did that is because,
for the past few years, I've held the believe that marriage is
unnecessary. In modern society, people get married and divorced, so
marriage clearly is not a deterrent against couples separating. At the
same time, people are having sex and kids without being married, and so
marriage is not the only way to children. In fact, the simple fact of
being married says nothing about the person's state, whether they are
happy, in love, have kids. The only thing it does say is how that person
can file tax returns.

The above philosophy, as I discovered a few months ago, is called [free
love](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Free_love). If marriage does not say
anything about a couple, then it is unnecessary. People can fall and
remain in love just as well if they weren't married, and if marriage
does not provide anything for them, well, why are they married? From
this psychological point of view, marriage has nothing to real offer.
Certainly it might provide a false sense of comfort, knowing that they
are recognized as a couple. But again, that is not a contract (or at
least, not one that is difficult to break), and so if the spouse really
wanted to leave, the other is powerless to stop them.

Everything I said above is empirically true. People know, perhaps not
consciously, that marriage is not a miracle cure for relationships. That
said, marriage in its current form is not entirely pointless. From a
sociological point of view, I can understand if marriage encourages
children, which will help sustain the society. Marriage also stabilizes
the two people involved, so support each other and prevent more extreme
actions. Also, for the two people married, there are various benefits to
being married and having children, most of them being economical, such
as tax cuts. These results, however, are not unique to marriage. There
are other ways to get tax cuts, other ways to provide support for
people. More importantly, these are not benefits in terms of the
relationship, but benefits to the society and to each individual.
Marriage in this sense is simply a trade agreement between two
individuals and the government.

Now, let me address same-sex marriages for a bit. From the Christian
perspective, same-sex marriage is at best unnecessary, and at worst a
sin. The first is easier to understand: since two people of the same
gender cannot have children, there is no need for them to be married.
This interpretation, of course, does not explicitly deny the right of
marriage to these individuals. The worst interpretation, that
homosexuality is a sin, is slightly harder to understand. Just as
marriage is simply recommended and nothing further can be said, so too
is the status of homosexuality as a transgression against God.

The problem, as anyone who has talked to me about religion will know, is
that such claims are unsupported. Why is homosexuality bad? It is not
[against nature](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Homosexuality_in_animals),
and if consensual it doesn't physically affect anyone other than the
participants. Further, marriage is considered a universal human right,
as stated in the [Universal Declaration of Human Rights (article
16)](http://www.un.org/Overview/rights.html).

Moving past the church, I also have issues with several positions <span
id="SPELLING_ERROR_2" class="blsp-spelling-corrected">opponents</span>
to same-sex marriage have, specifically the arguments that same-sex
couples can already get civil unions, and that it would be against the
tradition of marriage. For the first, claiming that civil unions give
the same rights as marriage, and yet refusing marriage itself, is simply
a reenactment of the "separate but equal" system of segregation against
blacks. Either both homosexual and heterosexual couples should only be
allowed civil unions, or both should be allowed to marry. As for the
latter argument, that it is against the tradition of marriage, there are
examples that tradition is not always the good thing. Slavery, too, has
been a tradition, since at least the Egyptians (who built the pyramids?)
and lasting till at least the 19<span id="SPELLING_ERROR_3"
class="blsp-spelling-error">th</span> century in the United States, and
is still rampant in some regions. Should slavery been kept for
tradition's sake? Probably not, and so keeping marriage purely for
tradition's sake is not a valid argument.

There is, however, a bigger issue at hand: why is the government
recognizing marriages anyway? For the purpose of the state, marriage is
merely a way to record that two people are related in a specific way. It
turns out there's another term for that, one I've already mentioned:
civil union. Marriage, as a religious concept, should not even be used
in the law, as per the doctrine of the separation of church and state.
Let the church worry about who can get "married"; the state only needs
to worry about who can get civil unions.

One last point, although this might be considered extreme. One might
ask, why are civil unions special? Consider the fact that the state does
not govern any other kind of human relationships: there are no records
of who is friends with who, or if someone had an extramarital affair.
Logically, the government is only interested in the economic aspects of
relationships, and its impact on society in general. The important thing
is not that two people are married, but that they are somehow
economically different. If that is the true purpose of marriage related
laws, then perhaps even civil unions should be abandoned. Speaking from
a purely theoretical point of view, the government should more correctly
define a maximum number of people allowed (although the exact number
would be controversial) in a "social group", and use that as the unit
for economic and social evaluations. This way, if people feel they are
attached to someone, regardless of their gender, they will have the
rights and duties of being "united". If a group of people feel the same
way about everyone else in the group (colloquially, polygamy or more
correctly [<span id="SPELLING_ERROR_4"
class="blsp-spelling-error">polyamory</span>](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Polyamory)),
they would be accepted as a single social unit as well.

While the above may seem like crazy talk, there is also clearly a system
of (bizarre) morals underneath it all, which I will explore at a later
date.

