Title: Meritocracy vs. Diversity
Date: 2009-04-22 05:00
Author: justinnhli
Slug: meritocracy-vs-diversity

I recently finished Daniel Golden's book Price of Admission: How
America's Ruling Class Buys Its Way into Elite Colleges. The main thesis
of his book is that colleges, instead of admitting people based purely
on how strong they are academically, are instead giving an advantage to
those with "hooks": athletes, children of big donors, alumni, faculty,
or celebrities (in both popular culture and politics). The ideal
admission policy is a meritrocracy - if you can demonstrate that you are
good at school, then you get in.

At the same time, Golden is also a proponent of diversity on college
campuses. That is, the student body of colleges should have the same
distributions of race and social status as the nation at large.

Here's an [uncomfortable truth](http://xkcd.com/561/): meritocracy and
diversity, in the current social state of the nation, cannot coexist
perfectly.

What do we mean by merit? The problem is that the demonstration of merit
often times requires opportunities, which unlike intelligence is not
distributed evenly across the population. Let's say someone has a lot of
potential at computer programming, but happened to be born into a
household that could not afford computers. There is minimal computer
training in schools, and so this person never develops this potential,
despite being better at it than a lot of other people. Should this
person be admitted to a top computer science program? In theory, yes,
although of course the admissions officers see nothing to indicate this
person's competence in the field, and therefore in practice, no.

Here's another uncomfortable truth: there are objective truths to
steorotypes.

Due to the unequal opportunities given to people of different races and
social statuses, it is true that white Americans have a much higher
graduation rate from high school than black Americans. Ideally, social
policies would eliminate this difference, but so far it has failed to do
so completely (though I'm sure it has made big steps in that direction).
Because of this measurable statistic, it is scientifically valid to have
a priori assumptions about someone's education level depending on their
race/background.

This about it this way. If I tell you that in a bag of marbles, 67.4%
are striped. In another bag, 44.7% are striped. If you draw a marble
from the first bag and had to guess whether it was striped, you would
probably say yes. Draw from the second bag, however, and you'd probably
say no.

*67.4% is the percentage of Asians 25 and over with some college
experience; 44.7% is the percentage for Blacks
([source](http://www.census.gov/prod/2004pubs/p20-550.pdf)).* Just
because the objects are now people, and the attributes are now education
level, doesn't change the way these probabilities are analyzed.

Back to diversity. If Golden's idea of diversity is to be realized, then
colleges should take, say, the top 15% of its applicants of each race.
Factor in socioeconomic diversity, and it will be the top 15% of each
race-status group. This process is a rough equivalent of giving
"admission points" to applicants who come from challenging backgrounds;
there's an assumption here that people of the same economic status has
the same (or lack the same) opportunities. Of course, it's possible to
do this on an individual level, but whether there are resources
available to evaluate each applicant that carefully is questionable.

In either case, it is clear that this group is not equal to the top 15%
of the entire pool of applicants. Any kind of standard of merit can be
used; *as long as race and socioeconomic status influences the
opportunities a student gets* (and I fear it always will), *meritocracy
and diversity are not mutually compatible.*

The question is, which one do we value more? Politically, of course, we
want to say that our colleges give the same chances to everyone, that we
are race and wealth blind; educationally, colleges want the brightest
students, so when they graduate they will add to the list of alumni with
high accomplishments. What societal factors are making colleges choose
the first over the second?

I am personally in favor of a pure meritocracy, racial and economic
diversity be damned. But then again, I am Asian, I come from a well-off
family, and I consider myself (pretty) above average.

