Title: Music Animation Machine
Date: 2008-06-19 19:31
Author: justinnhli
Slug: music-animation-machine

I was listening to Tommy Emmanuel's rendition of Classical Gas, and got
sidetracked to Vanessa Mae's version. My favorite piece of hers is
Bach's Toccata and Fugue in D minor, but after that another video caught
my attention. It was a scrolling bar score of the piece, created by the
[Music Animation Machine](http://www.musanim.com/).

Although they put it in nicer terms, what they have is essentially a
visualization for music, and only for MIDI. However, I was taken by the
idea, because the mapping from music to visualization is so clear. It is
simply a slightly simplified rendition of the music score, and therefore
is a homomorphic (I think) function. In this sense, the scrolling bar
score <span style="font-style:italic;">is</span> the music, just as any
normal score is. With this simplified score though, the structure of the
music becomes much clearer, espeically for complex orchestral pieces.

I encourage you to go over and play with the software (which is
unfortunately Windows only). You can look at a few videos of what it
does first on [YouTube](http://www.youtube.com/user/smalin), but it's
more fun to put in pieces yourself. I particularly enjoyed its output
for Beethoven's [Pastoral
Symphony](http://www.classicalmusicmidipage.com/music/index.php?composer=3)
(the last link), as well as some of Bach's fugues
([here](http://mypage.direct.ca/a/abartel/midi.htm) and
[here](http://www.kunstderfuge.com/bach/canons.htm#Kunst%20der%20Fuge)).

