Title: Nerd: A Retrospective
Date: 2013-11-13 16:00
Author: justinnhli
Slug: nerd-a-retrospective

One of the few instances of shopping I remember as a kid probably also
says the most about me. This was around 1999, and software was still
sold on CD's. Back then, Hong Kong had a giant market for bootleg
software. The Wan Chai Computer Centre, then and still one of the
biggest specialty malls for computer related stuff, was simply store
after store of ripped games and productivity products. I remember
spending my slowly-earned pocket money on some deal - any three CDs for
some special price. The three CDs I chose: [Rise of the
Robots](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rise_of_the_Robots), [Populous: The
Beginning](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Populous:_The_Beginning), and...
[Microsoft Encarta](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Encarta) 1997.
Actually, I'm not sure if the first two were what I bought (they were
both games I eventually owned), but I am certain Encarta came from that
incident.

I think even then, my parents were shocked that I would spend money on
reference software. I myself cannot tell you why I did it, except that I
did. I still have fond memories of the thing: the encyclopedia came with
an interactive orbit simulator, where you have to set the Moon's initial
position and velocity such that it is captured by Earth. There was also
[Mind Maze](https://www.google.com/search?q=mindmaze&tbm=isch), a trivia
game where you must find your way out of a grid of connected rooms.

Now that I've jogged my memory, Encarta wasn't even the only educational
software we had. I remember spending hours on [Operation
Neptune](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Operation_Neptune_(video_game))
and Treasure Galaxy!, both of which were by [The Learning
Company](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Learning_Company). Ditto for
[Where in the World is Carmen
Sandiego](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Where_in_the_World_Is_Carmen_Sandiego%3F_(1996)),
the full version for which includes a two-inch-thick geography
reference. I also had a virtual observatory, and one where you're in
this cave-turned-museum, and you can move around and watch crystals and
minerals grow. I think the last two are both by DK, but I can't find any
reference to it.

In retrospect, a lot of my nerdier and more academic interests exhibited
themselves early. I remember in primary school (that's grade 1 to 6 for
you Americans) having more than a few Dorling Kindersley reference
books, including one on space (who doesn't have one of those?), one on
dinosaurs (or one of these?), one on gemstones... As I grew older, my
collection of of non-fiction books continued to expand, now adding books
on the occult and on philosophy. I somehow read Thomas More's
[Utopia](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Utopia_%28book%29) in middle
school, as well as [Sophie's
World](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sophie%27s_World). I suppose this is
[humble-bragging](http://www.urbandictionary.com/define.php?term=humblebrag),
but I think it's also representative of my childhood.

It's curious that, despite the above description, I've slowly stopped
identifying myself as a nerd. It's not that I have lost interest in
these topics, but my definition of "nerd" has changed. In pop-culture,
nerds are more highly identified with people who follow particular
franchises: Star Trek/Wars, Middle Earth, Doctor Who, Dungeons and
Dragons, Halo... While I have enjoyed some of these universes, I am also
deficient in much of the canon; for example, I have yet to read
[Dune](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dune_%28book%29). I don't follow any
TV series (*maybe* with the exception of Sherlock), nor am I a gamer,
video, tabletop, board, or otherwise. By these definitions, then, I'm
not a nerd.

It's fun to speculate about the origins of these two different meanings
of "nerd". Being in academia, and computer science at that, you would
expect them to be nerd stereotype incarnates. But, in fact, most of my
friends in computer science are not hardcore gamers (with the exception
of a group who plays board games), and while pop-culture references do
come up, they do not form the backbone of our discourse. Perhaps
unsurprisingly, they are instead more likely to have diverse academic
interests, who would read books on sociology, math, or philosophy for
pleasure.

This makes me question how the stereotype of a nerd even started. The
origin story of hackers as tabletop gamers now seem less plausible to
me. If that is only a myth, then something else must have connected
academics with gamers. I don't think it's the social ineptitude, either,
and neither groups are obsessive about what they do. Wikipedia
[suggests](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nerd) that in academia, nerds
are more likely to be interested in science, mathematics, engineering,
linguistics, history, and technology. If I had to guess, it has
something to do with finding interesting combinations in complex,
rule-based systems. This doesn't jive with the history aspect though,
and it's surprising that law nerds is not a thing.

