Title: Nerd Sniped by Nerd Sniping
Date: 2013-08-09 21:40
Slug: nerd-sniped-by-nerd-sniping

I got [nerd sniped](http://xkcd.com/356/) today reading [*Paul
Lockhart’s A Mathematician’s
Lament*](http://www.goodreads.com/book/show/6232657-a-mathematician-s-lament).
It’s an excellent rant on the state of mathematics education, but it
also contains a short essay on why he finds mathematics fun. It
contained this problem:

> Do all [undirected
> graphs](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Graph_%28mathematics%29#Undirected_graph)
> (of order \> 2) contain at least two nodes with the same
> [degree](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Degree_%28graph_theory%29)?

Actually, the precise problem that got me is not important (I just
wanted to nerd snipe you too). As I was getting coffee and thinking
about it though, I wondered if the susceptibility of being nerd sniped
is correlated with the breadth of interest. It makes sense that the more
things you are interested, the more easily you’d be distracted by a
random, sufficiently difficult question. Of course, the “sufficiently
difficult” part is hard to measure, but we’ll let that go for now.

But then it occurred to me that all the nerd sniping questions I know
are (at least somewhat) logical in nature. I can’t imagine someone being
nerd sniped by a history question. For example, I don’t know anything
about the causes of World War I, other than that it involved the
assassination of Archduke Ferdinand (wow, I even got the name right; I
wrote that without checking my sources). But I can’t imagine myself
dropping everything to think about this problem. I don’t think this is a
lack of interest, either; I can’t even imagine my historian friends
doing this. ([Yes, I have friends. Shut
up.](http://leftoversoup.com/archive.php?num=244))

I feel the difference is that, for the logic-based questions, it’s not
the answer that matters, but the process of getting there. I can tell
you the answer to the graph problem: yes (…probably. I haven’t solved it
yet). But that answer is not satisfying. It’s like looking at the
solution of a solved Sudoku puzzle; the only thing it tells you is that
the board can be solved. (For this reason, I think it's pointless to
print Sudoku solutions, as long as I trust them to be solvable.) For
both the original infinite-grid-of-resistors problem and the graph
problem, I want to know how that answer was derived. I might not even
believe your answer until you’ve shown me the proof. (By the way, the
answer to the resistor problem is 4/pi - 0.5 ohms.)

But that’s not true of the question about World War I. If you tell me
(to whatever detail) [why WWI
occurred](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Causes_of_World_War_I), and I
would nod and go on my way. I wouldn’t question your explanation (unless
it contradicts something I already know), and I wouldn’t question your
source of knowledge.

I first thought that this is because the answer is trivially obtainable
from, say, Wikipedia; but then, I could also have looked up the proof
and be done with it. It’s also not the case that the question about WWI
requires a long explanation (eg. it asks “why/how”), while the graph
question requires just a binary answer (eg. it asks “do”). I can
transform both questions the other way (“Was the assassination of
Archduke Ferdinand a factor in starting WWI?” and “Why do all undirected
graphs have two nodes with the same degree?”), and the feeling remains
the same. Notice, though, that the reworded graph question now presumes
an answer, so the new question actually gives more information than the
old one.

As I thought more about this, I realized that I get nerd sniped by
questions outside of the maths and sciences as well. I’ve nerd sniped
someone before with the question, “Is the statement “Unicorns have one
horn” true or false?”. I myself have spent entire afternoons thinking
about questions from psychology/philosophy, the latest being the nature
of vulnerability. Although, if I apply the same reasoning of whether I’d
want to know the reasoning behind the answer, I’m not sure if the
psychology question is truly a nerd sniper.

Maybe there are also shades of being sniped too. While I wouldn’t think
too long on the question of, say, the [significance of socks in the
Harry Potter
series](http://www.mugglenet.com/books/oddities_socks.shtml), I can
imagine myself disagreeing with someone else’s answer, leading to an
afternoon of debate. It’s not as powerful a sniper as the logical
questions, and there’s confusion between the appeal of the problem
itself with the appeal of a good discussion. I wouldn’t call it nerd
sniping for this reason, but it’s still something that would cause me to
stop what I’m doing.

I don’t have any answers to my questions about nerd sniping raised here.
I am curious whether and how much my mathematical and scientific
background has biased me in what I get sniped by. I would love to hear
from people in history or anthropology or related subjects, and see if
there are questions that get them but don’t get me.

…Once you get over how I’ve just nerd sniped all of you, of course.

