Title: On This Infinite Grid of Ideal 1-ohm Resistors...
Date: 2007-12-21 19:27
Author: justinnhli
Slug: on-this-infinite-grid-of-ideal-1-ohm-resistors

This is from one of [xkcd's recent comics](http://www.xkcd.com/356/),
talking about stopping people dead in their tracks with intriguing
problems... "nerd sniping". It's about on the same level of
effectiveness as a weapon as the [world's deadliest
joke](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CjbYNgIi5ss), which even has a
[mention in
Wikipedia](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_funniest_joke_in_the_world).
Going back to the comic, the problem of an infinite grid of resistors is
apparently from the Google Labs Aptitute Test, which I looked up. The
questions were harder and more ingenious than I thought they would be,
especially the numeric-acoustic ones.

I remain, however, one of the people who are easily nerd sniped
(computer scientist for one point?). Here's an example. I thought about
the actual question for a bit, using my rusty physics skills, and could
only narrow it down to the resistance being larger than 0 but smaller
than 3 (since the two nodes are on a parallel circuit, and the
resistance has to be smaller than the smallest resistance).

There's a fairly popular flash game called [Desktop Tower
Defense](http://www.handdrawngames.com/DesktopTD/Game.asp), a strategy
game of sorts. I played it for a bit, then did the "fun" version where
you start with 10000 gold. I spent the next few hours (or days) trying
to create as long a path as possible for the creeps. That would mean
more towers and more time for me to deal damage. I think my last version
lasted up till level 40+ before I had to upgrade the towers...

FOOOOM

Headshot.

Clearly, this is one of the xkcd comics which real life should <span
style="font-style:italic;">not</span>
[imitate](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Xkcd#.22Life_Imitates_xkcd.22).

