Title: On Vulnerability
Date: 2013-11-25 14:40
Author: justinnhli
Category: ifttt
Slug: on-vulnerability

I think a lot of times we use words without really understanding what
they mean. I don't mean this in the "here's a new word let's use it"
way, but that often the use of a word has more meaning than might be
found in a dictionary. "Vulnerability" is one such word.

I started thinking about this word over the summer, when I was having a
conversation with a friend. I was sharing a personally-meaningful quote
with them, when they told me that I'm making them feel vulnerable. I
didn't pursue it at the time, but afterwards I thought it was strange:
since it was *me* who was saying something personally meaningful, how
was it that *they* felt vulnerable?

The dictionary definition of (psychological) vulnerability is the
feeling of likelihood of being hurt. While this seems correct on the
surface, it is also insufficiently nuanced. We do not, for example, feel
vulnerable while succumb to a disease, nor when facing a tiger.
(Granted, not having experienced either, I can only speculate; but these
scenarios doesn't evoke the description of vulnerability to me.) At
least, it's not the disease or the tiger, in and of itself, that leads
to the feeling of vulnerability.

I started thinking of instance where we might describe the feeling as
vulnerable:

-   discussing personal trauma
-   giving a sincere compliment
-   sharing a secret

Of these three, the second one about compliments needs elaboration.
Imagine a friend who has gone through a rough period. You meet up with
them after being out of contact for a couple years, and find that they
have moved, with a new job and a circle of friends; they seem to have
moved pass their previous difficulties. You want to them that you're
glad that they're okay, and more than that, that you're proud that
they've managed. The latter, in particular, seems to evoke feelings of
vulnerability.

Weirdly enough, the breakthrough came for me from considering whether
there were people who would *never* be vulnerable. Specifically, I was
thinking those with impaired affect: the sociopaths, the
[schizoid](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Schizoid_personality_disorder),
and so on. It was a hunch, but it seemed to me that the stereotypical
emotionless sociopath wouldn't feel vulnerable, not because they don't
feel things, but because they don't care about the reaction of others.

If my hunch is correct, it would mean that vulnerability is not so much
about the fear of getting hurt, but about the fear of *indifference* to
some strong emotion. This is what connects the three examples above:
it's that the person feels strongly about the subject (trauma,
compliments, or secrets), and they fear that this feeling might be
dismissed as unimportant.

A more recent experience of mine seemed to confirm this explanation. I
was meeting a friend for dinner, someone whom I used to have a crush on;
she knew this, but I was rejected, and I eventually got over it. A
couple days before, I suddenly learned that her boyfriend (who I also
knew) was visiting, and would be joining us as well. Upon learning this,
I was suddenly ambivalent about the whole thing, which puzzled me. It
wasn't exactly romantic jealousy, since I no longer desired a
relationship with her. Eventually, though, I realized I was feeling
vulnerable about the dinner and, by the above definition, I figured out
that I was afraid she would somehow downplay my previous feelings for
her by, for example, openly making out with her boyfriend. Nothing of
that sort happened, of course, but I felt better knowing the source of
my feelings.

That, I think, is one of the best reasons for figuring out the true
meaning of words: it lets you more quickly understand what is going on
when you are tempted to describe yourself with it. I'm not sure if this
is really a subfield of philosophy or linguistics - the study of
[semasiology](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Semasiology) or [lexical
semantics](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lexical_semantics) comes close.
Regardless, I've been thinking a lot about what people mean when they
use different words (also on the list: "true", as in this ["expresses
something *true* [about
people]"](http://leftoversoup.com/archive.php?num=294)), and I thought
people would be interested in my thought process.

PS. I'm aware I never finished the story about my friend; this is
deliberate, as the quote I shared reflects as much about them as it does
about me. This makes it somebody else's secret, and not my story to
tell.

