Title: Our Upcoming Digital World
Date: 2010-09-01 00:00
Slug: our-upcoming-digital-world

Two converging sources led me to write this today.

The first is a duology (or dilogy, to be etymologically correct) by
Daniel Suarez, titled Daemon and Freedom (TM). I first heard of Daemon
from the [Long Now Foundation
blog](http://longnow.org/seminars/02008/aug/08/daemon-bot-mediated-reality/),
where the author talked about how the world is increasingly being run by
computers. The [online
preview](http://www.thedaemon.com/daemonpreview.html) hooked me, and
I've been searching for a copy ever since. I finally got my hands on
both books two weeks ago. Michigan's copy of Daemon had been
continuously checked out for a long time; I decided to get a copy of
Freedom through [ILLiad](http://www.oclc.org/illiad/), thinking they
would check it out from the Ann Arbor Public Library - I later found my
copy came all the way from Yale. They were good reads, techno-thrillers
that refuse to be put down. Saying the books are merely techno-thrillers
grossly underestimates their scope - Suarez embedded political,
economic, and philosophical viewpoints in the narrative - but here I
will only address his description of technology and its impact on
society.

The storyline of the novels follows a revolution, from a society very
similar to our own to one where the digital world is (even more) deeply
integrated into the fabric of everyone's lives. This integration is
primarily through a computer problem (the titular
[Daemon](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Daemon_%28computer_software%29%29),
which controls everyone's private information. This consists mainly of
three things: a person's unique ID (UID), their credit, and their role
and competency in that role. A
[UID](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unique_identifier) is just that -
some name or series of characters which uniquely identifies a person. A
person's credit is also a familiar concept: it is the digital currency
of the society. Finally, a person's role and competency (or "level")
stems from role playing game terminology; it describes what a person is
good at, and how good they are at it. For example, the novel often shows
articles by high level (say, level 12 or above) journalists.

Each piece of information stored by the Daemon is part of the overall
system, but a larger view of the system is needed first. Each member of
this new society wears specialized sunglasses, equipped with a [head-up
display (HUD)](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Head-up_display) and powered
by a wearable power source - in most cases, a battery belt. The HUD is a
[thin client](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thin_client) to the Daemon -
that is, it only provides access to the system but does not run the
Daemon itself. Wireless Internet access is assumed, so the glasses are
always connected to the Daemon. It transmits two sets of data to the
Daemon: it's current location through GPS, and biometric data of its
wearer. This biometric data - everything from fingerprints and iris
scans to gait and breathing patterns - is stored together with a
person's UID. DNA could presumably be stored as well, although it was
not mentioned in the novels. This comprehensive profile of a person
makes identity theft near impossible.

The GPS location, on the other hand, allows the Daemon to provide the
user with information. Aside from data about people, the Daemon also
stores information about objects. These could either be information
about locations (think of a history of, for example, the Eiffel Tower)
or information about real world objects. The latter is achieved through
ubiquitous
[RFID](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Radio-frequency_identification)
tags. Pooling these databases together, a user can access information
about everything in their surrounding.

A word about RFID tagged objects. In addition to giving information
about an object's history (for example), the Daemon can perform other
tasks with the help of embedded, integrated circuits in the object. One
example is an ownership check: since the Daemon controls the economy
(more on this later), it knows who an object belongs to. If an
unauthorized person tries to use an object, the Daemon could
automatically disable or even destroy the object. Since the Daemon is
connected to most digital systems (more on how it did this later),
objects could also be given "magical" properties. The books show a ring
which will erase the wearer from security camera feeds: the Daemon
associates the user and the ring, finds cameras pointed at the users
location, and edits the video in real time to cover the user with the
background.

Obviously, such an object could be misused - which is where a user's
credit and role come into play. Together, these two pieces of
information determine what someone is or is not allowed to do. While the
idea of credits is easy to understand, role and level requires some
explanation. As mentioned above, a person's role shows what the person
is capable of doing. This may be production related - the knowledge to
use a milling machine, for example - or skill based, such as the
knowledge to write programs. The level is some measure of how much
experience and how competent the person is with this ability. There is a
third piece of data I have not mentioned - a person's reputation. This
is again publicly viewable, and is simply an average of how others
"rate" their interaction with this person. A low reputation would mean
that the user frequently lies, or cheats, or is rude, while a high
reputation means the user consistently does their job well. The creation
and registration of objects with the Daemon often require several people
to cooperate, and any one could refuse base on the others reputation.
The Daemon itself performs checks on a person's credit and levels, to
ensure that only responsible individuals could use powerful objects like
the ring above.

Credit and reputation could be used in another way: to directly
influence the society around you. For example, "news" within this
society are simply pieces of media produced by users, then rated by
other people. The initial rating of a piece of news depends on the
reputation and level of the publisher. A person could also use their
reputation to create "jobs" - things they want other people to do.
Presumably, those who fulfill the requirements of the job - which might
be something as simple as transcribing a minute of video - would gain
credit or reputation or both.

For a society like the one described to survive, the stability and
security of its infrastructure - that is, the Daemon - is crucial. In
the novel, the Daemon first gained control as a virus botnet, gaining
access to massive computing and storage capability. With this ability,
it hacked into the financial and security systems worldwide, thereby
forcing the world to accept its presence. The initial selection of
people to receive HUD glasses were selected based on highly specific
rules; once its members reached a critical mass, newcomers had to be
interviewed by members - who are scanned with fMRI for honesty. It is
also at this point the Daemon makes its source code publicly available,
thus preventing minorities from taking over the system and also allowing
the will of the majority to implement new procedures. Finally, the
Daemon also executes the punishments in this society, including the
removal of credits or in extreme cases, death (through the control of
motorcycles with swords).

That concludes the description of Suarez's novel universe.

Before I talk about the second source of inspiration for this post, I
want to point out which parts of the novel is science fiction and which
parts are existing technology. The fictional aspects are surprisingly
limited. The obvious ones include the sword wielding motorcycles,
realistic and useful HUDs, fMRI lie detection (although this is a
developing field), and (sadly) ubiquitous wireless internet access.
Other things which sound fantastical are only fictional in degree:
[botnets](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Botnet) *do* exist and *could*
potentially harness the computing power to hack commercial networks.
RFIDs are embedded in a lot of consumer products - including books,
media players, and passports - and the devices needed to read RFIDs are
cheap and easy to obtain. GPS is already a widespread technology, and in
fact people already broadcast their location through services like
[Facebook Places](http://blog.facebook.com/blog.php?post=418175202130),
[Twitter](http://blog.twitter.com/2010/06/twitter-places-more-context-for-your.html),
and [Foursquare](http://foursquare.com/about). Finally, socially defined
value systems are everywhere: Amazon ratings, news sites like
[Reddit](http://www.reddit.com/) and [Digg](http://digg.com/news), and
on social networks like Facebook and MySpace. Of course, digital
currency has been in use for the past half a century and drives most of
today's financial markets. Finally,
[crowdsourcing](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Crowdsourcing) is already
available to people, through Amazon's [Mechanical
Turk](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Amazon_Mechanical_Turk) service (the
name of which is inspired by the original
[Turk](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Turk), a fake AI).

My second inspiration likes with this later group. I watched a [TED
talk](http://www.ted.com/talks/seth_priebatsch_the_game_layer_on_top_of_the_world.html)
today by Seth Priebatsch on "The Game Layer on top of the World".
Priebatsch is the founder of [SCVNGR](http://www.scvngr.com/), an API
which allows companies and individuals to build "challenges" at certain
locations. These challenges earned the player points, which could be
redeemed as coupons for those companies. Although I knew of all the
services I mentioned above, it was only with the talk did I realize how
near a future Suarez could be describing. Priebatsch's introduced his
talk by saying today's social networks are disorganized, despite the
potential of harnessing all the information a person puts online. The
main difference between our present technology and that of Suarez's -
aside from the science fiction elements already mentioned - is the
transparency of information. By infecting global financial databases and
forcing the system on people, the Daemon had the power to require the
transparent broadcast of reputation and ratings. Without this central
(and impersonal, unbiased, not-for-profit) force, there will always be
concerns of monopoly and anti-trust for any company that gains control.

This was my original topic, by the way: that an open source, transparent
program would solve the problems of a Randian utopia I talked about
[before](http://justinnhli.com/posts/2010/07/atlas-shrugged.html). I
believe that humanity will ultimately become the society described by
Suarez, which inherently contains the values of production described by
Rand, although policed in a very different form that what Rand
envisioned. Technology has grown too quickly for society, especially our
customs, to keep up: just look at the debates on net neutrality and
digital copyright. Human right issues are related - the Daemon does not
care whether you are Caucasian or African American, homosexual or
heterosexual, Christian or atheist, but only your ability to give value
to those around you.

I don't know what conditions would lead humanity to implement a change
like that though.

Last thought: I mentioned that the Daemon's world was opt-in, that you
have to decide to meet with interviewers. The current trend of
ubiquitous computing is on smart phones, which I have yet to own one. In
the novels, the people who stayed with the outside world were left with
a dying economy; I wonder what world I will live in if I continue to
refuse mobile technology.

