Title: Personal Responsibility
Date: 2011-02-02 23:35
Slug: personal-responsibility

Author's note: I know this is pretty bad writing, but I've been
struggling to put this idea down in words and this is the best I could
do.

On the bus today I overheard a conversation about someone only taking 12
credits, then saying "but it's not my fault I'm only taking 12 credits."
That got me angry, I've been thinking about the idea of personal
responsibility for the past month - and trying to write about it ,
unsuccessfully - and that kind of excuse is the last thing I want to
hear. The main idea is that people are responsible for themselves no
matter the circumstance. In psychology we recently read Neil Postman,
who wrote that TV and newspaper are destroying people's capacity to
understand longer pieces of language, which was more common before when
people listed to 7 hour speeches and debates (which is also where
Lincoln-Douglas debates came from). But it's not the case that books
don't exist anymore, just that TV and newspaper, with its short,
out-of-global-context pieces, are much more attention grabbing and much
less attention requiring. If people want they can still choose to read,
but they don't. To blame the media for this is to take the
responsibility away from the individual, over what the individual could
control but chose not to. Either you accept you made the choice and live
with it, or you get out.. To say you didn't have the choice is to say
you're not in charge of your life - and in that case, you deserve all
the misery you feel.

I don't know when I acquired this sense of individual responsibility -
there are traces of my high school existentialism class in this - but
recent news events made me think about it more often. There was the
[WikiLeaks diplomatic cable
leak](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/United_States_diplomatic_cables_leak),
where I believe the intelligence officer Bradley Manning should be
court-martialed but that WikiLeaks is crime free The justification is
that Manning signed a contract/swore an oath to keep data confidential,
and leaking the cable constitutes violating that contract and taking
back his word. WikiLeaks made no such promise, and their actions are at
worst inappropriate or distasteful., but in no way illegal. There was
[the
case](http://arstechnica.com/tech-policy/news/2011/01/fed-charge-two-for-allegedly-exploiting-video-poker-bug.ars)
of two people who used a bug in casino video poker machines and used it
to win jackpots. They are being sued by the casino for fraud - but, I
assume, the developers are not suffering any consequences. This case is
particularly egregious because at a casino you're expected to try and
win. You may be thrown out or barred for counting cards- again, legal
because casinos are private property (although look at [Atlantic
City](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Card_counting#Legal_status)) - but
courting cards is not against the law. How is exploiting a bug in video
poker any different? It is the developer of the machine who are
ultimately responsible. If there was no way to load poker in the house's
favor, casino's wouldn't be playing it, except in this case the poker
machine is faulty.

There's [the
case](http://news.yahoo.com/s/ap/20110115/ap_on_hi_te/us_facebook_stalker)
of a stalker using information from Facebook to guess people's security
questions on email accounts, then blackmailing them with explicit photos
from there. I'm not saying the stalker is guilt free, for he is in
violation of the law- and he chose to blackmail these people. But the
victims are also naive to use such easily answerable security questions,
not to mention taking and keeping explicit photos of themselves.

In my mind I extend this responsibility of choice to a person's entire
life course. To think that people didn't know dropping out of school
will result in a hard life is absurd. It's not that dropouts always end
up nowhere - look at Bill Gates and Steve Jobs - but its that people
chose that course and later complain about it, or blame the
circumstances for their suffering without considering their complicity
in ending there in the first place. There are things we have no control
over - one could be born with AIDS, or into war, or be abused - and even
then the circumstance should not be blamed for all the failures of the
victim. Being forced to immigrate by your parents due to bankruptcy does
not justify spending romance novels all day and only ever working server
positions.

Let me be clear on this part, in case you haven't gotten it yet. I don't
think it's bad to read novels all day and serve as a waitress for the
rest of your life. If that has been your greatest desire since
kindergarten, I think it's wonderful you have achieved your ultimate -
if perhaps small - life goal. My problem is when you find that situation
is not to your liking, and your refuse to accept responsibility for
being in  
that situation nor take initiative in changing it. It's your fucking
life, fucking live up to it.

PS. I am aware that there are gray areas in the above philosophy. There
are circumstances that, although preventable, would have required
inhuman foresight. Flood insurance may have made life easier, but if you
live where floods are unlikely, then it's potentially excusable. It
comes down to what "common sense" dictates, which is debatable. But the
big idea here is not to prevent all negative experiences, but to not use
that as a crutch preventing happiness.

PPS. Related reading: [The Rise of the New Global
Elite](http://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/print/2011/01/the-rise-of-the-new-global-elite/8343/).

