Title: Playing for the Greater Good
Date: 2007-11-16 19:42
Author: justinnhli
Slug: playing-for-the-greater-good

The website [FreeRice.com](http://www.freerice.com/) was launched only a
month and some ago, aiming to provide food for the hungry. The way it
works is, when you go to the site and play the vocabulary game, the site
earns money through its banner ads. When you get a question right, some
of that money will be directed to the UN to buy food. Besides being
charity (which is not too powerful a motivator), the site draws visitors
because it helps people learn new words, and people can boast about how
many grains they raised and what vocab level they're at.

After playing for a while (and donating 600+ grains of rice, at an
average vocab level of 32-34 out of 50), I thought about the structure
and purpose of the site, and found it similar to [Google's Image
Labeler](http://images.google.com/imagelabeler/). The Labeler is another
web based game, this time with the purpose of correctly labeling items
which appears in images in Google's database. This time, the motivation
for visitors is only the points you get for playing the game, the top
ten or so of which is listed on the front page.

The similarity between these two sites is obviously, but somewhat hard
to define. It's a high level concept, that both sites are somehow
transforming an otherwise boring activity into a game, which people will
spontaneously play. They are taking advantage of human nature and social
dynamics to push forward a different goal, whether it's a global hunger
campaign or simply for that company's benefit.

There are of course other examples of sites using social dynamics to
further a cause. Example: the many Facebook Darfur groups that say for
every so many members they will donate some money. Google recently had a
DonorsChoose event, where netizens can challenge the readers of their
blogs and websites to fund teachers with their classroom needs. There
was also Blog Action Day, where bloggers take one day to reflect on
environmental issues. On the political side, this year presidential
candidates have used Facebook, Youtube, and other social websites to
help with their campaign as well, although of course their cause is not
as, say we say, universal as Darfur and world hunger.

If we look at this from a wider perspective, these ideas are good
because it is taking advantage of what is otherwise wasted energy and
finding a use for it. If there is no FreeRice.com, or no Darfur Facebook
group, we would probably still be on Facebook or the internet checking
up on our friends and doing other mundane things. Instead of letting us
procrastinate aimlessly, these sites give a cause for us to be on the
internet (and make us feel better about not working).

Examples of turning waste into resource is actually a common theme in
engineering. Ideas about using the greenhouse effect as a wind turbine,
tidal power plants, these are all using what is otherwise wasted energy
to do some work (in the physics sense of the word). In the vocabulary of
green (environmental) engineering, these ideas are taking the natural
system dynamics into account, so they don't have to do any extra work.

I will leave you with one last example. I'm sure as netizens you've all
experienced CAPTCHAs, the combination of letters and numbers you have to
type to verify to a website that you are human. There is a project
called [reCAPTCHA](http://recaptcha.net/), which uses scanned words from
books as the image shown to you. This way, users of the website is not
only identifying themselves as human, but also helping the
digitalization of books. Clever huh?

