Title: Porn and Intimacy
Date: 2009-07-06 05:00
Slug: porn-and-intimacy

It is rare that I talk about something so personal on my blog. My life
is at a changing point, very saliently a point where the future is wide
open and I get to decide where it should go. There are some other
circumstances which I don't feel like elaborating on, but let it be
suffice to say that this has been on my mind somewhat recently.

I think it would surprising some people for them to know I consume a lot
of porn. I actually remember the first time I saw anything indecent on
the internet. I was probably only 10 at the time, and was trying to get
on the search engine Infoseek. I had mistyped the URL, however, and
typed in "ifoseek" instead, which turned out to be some porn site. Much
later I would classify this as an instance of cybersquatting, but I
didn't know any of that at the time. I remember fighting the urge to go
back, but eventually I succumbed, and the whole world of online
pornography opened up for me. For a long time I was ashamed of it, but
in the last few years that changed. It might partially be due to the
fact that the Internet being filled with porn is just widely accepted,
and as well as the fact that a lot of people watch porn. I think part of
it also has to do with me taking a more rational trend in life, and I
critically pondered the question of whether porn ever actually does
anyone harm. I concluded that, aside from cases where the actors are
forced to do it (most prominently, child pornography), there is no
physical reason pornography is damaging. As for the whole moral
degradation argument, if you were one of those people who were surprised
that I watch porn, maybe you should rethink the argument that porn makes
men objectify women.

But I don't want to spend this post rebutting the negative affects of
pornography. Instead, I want to give a more personal account of
pornography, and what I have learned about myself from it. Regardless of
it's influence on morals, I do think pornography often depicts humans as
(shall we say) animals. That is, the plot of a pornographic movie, if
there is one at all, tends to portray people as thinking of nothing but
sex. There is no consideration of time, money, possibility of getting
caught (unless that's what the director wanted). This past statement, of
course, is something I couldn't have said even 3 years ago. In the early
days I didn't really discriminate, and everything explicit on the web
looked the same to me. As I grew up and learned and thought more,
however, this trait of porn became clear to me. I must say that there
are times when mindless sex is exactly what you're looking for, but most
of the time nowadays I'm looking for something else: a connection.

My real problem with porn is that the actors rarely show concern for
each other. Although the act of sexual intercourse requires another
person, it is safe to say that both characters are more often than not
only concerned with their own desires. If the actress gave a blowjob,
it's not to please the buy, but because she "likes it". If I may, it's
the difference between being a friend because it keeps you from feeling
guilty, and being a friend because you truly care for their feelings.
Sex in the real world, I would think, is more about the other person's
desire. Both people may be horny, but there is the desire to make the
other person happy first. In porn, these acts of "giving" seem forced,
and are there more to satisfy the /audience/ than the /partner/.

Instead, lately I've been more attracted to amateur pornography. I don't
mean what professional studios label as "amateurs, but actual home made
videos. Often these are videos that couples have filmed of themselves,
probably for their own entertainment later. Because the actors are real
people (not fake characters) with feelings for each other, however,
these videos depict much more intimate acts of love making. And that's
what I'm looking for: the sense that what is shown is not simply two
animals copulating, but two humans with emotions and an intellect. What
they are doing is an extension of their love, because even a piece of
cloth between their bodies is too much to bare. It is, almost by
definition, a private moment, and therefore I also feel somewhat guilty
about it's distribution and consumption. But again, it's (mostly) a
victimless thing.

Given that it's rather easy to spot whether two people like each other,
I'm surprised that not more professional porn is done depicting this
connection. The most obvious clue, I think, are the actors hands. Are
they clasped and fondling (gently), or are they there just to hold the
other person in place? Is the brushing of the hair to see their face
better, or to give the camera a better angle? The face, too, is a big
area, just because we are so good at reading emotions. And then, of
course, the big orgasm thing - is there any involuntary movement?

I think the fact that I think in this way says a lot more about me than
the fact that I watch porn. One last thing... you may comment that I'm
looking for intimacy in the wrong place. I know.

