Title: Predestination and/or determinism
Date: 2008-12-19 14:32
Author: justinnhli
Slug: predestination-andor-determinism

[Wikipedia](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Predestination#Predestination_and_omniscience)tells
me that there is a difference between predestination and omniscience -
that the former is mostly religious, and it implies God not only knows
what will happen (omniscience), but had an active role in choosing
things to be so. Arguably, if God did create the universe, then his
omniscience would imply predestination... unless God didn't intend
certain things? But that paints a very unconcerned God, and I don't
think that's what most people want.

Anyway, the topic of fate and destiny came up back in June in
conversation with some friends. I've been asked to write about this, but
I never found the motivation to do so until now.

First, I want to state my belief that history is repeatable. That is,
for some paste event, if the same person (in name as well as in time)
was put in the same place at the same time, the same things would
happen. This is not really a statement about fate, since the person has
some freedom to choose what happens, or alternately their "choice" is
already determined. This does say something about human behavior though;
underneath this statement is an assumption that humans, if put in the
same situation, will behave in the same way. That is, a person's beliefs
together with the environment can directly predict a person's actions.

This may seem like a very deterministic view of life, but as I've said,
that is not the case. Although human action will lead to the next
timestep of beliefs and environment, nothing says this is a closed
system. The environment may change without human intervention, as it has
done so for millions of years before man arrived on the planet. More
important, even with free will actions can be deterministic. For
example, if a person is in a room and there's a fire, it is almost
certain that person will run towards the door. Of course, he has the
choice of choosing to stay, of even leap into the fire, but under normal
circumstances that won't happen.

I think more interesting is the question of where free will comes from.
Macroscopic physics is largely deterministic;given the positions and
velocities of air molecules, for example, and the momentum and position
of a coin, it's probably possible to calculate how it will land. Only on
the very small scale is there something that's random: atomic decay.
There is a question of whether something as impersonal as quantum
mechanics really means free will. But my problem with random atomic
decay has more to do with the definition of random. What appears random
to us may not in fact be non-deterministic. [Kolmogorov
complexity](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kolmogorov_complexity#Kolmogorov_randomness)(a
course which I dropped) defines a random string as something which
cannot be compressed; that is, there is no shorter description of the
string than the string itself. Given this definition, it is conceivable
that there is a book with the result of every coin toss recorded, and
coin tosses merely follow this book in results. The string would be
random (incompressible), but the results would actually be
deterministic. Parallels can be drawn to a "random number generator"
where the numbers are defined before hand by coin toss. The sequence
generated are random, but you know the sequence before hand. Something
like [this](http://xkcd.com/221/).

Besides this free-will, determinism, and predestination thing being
unknowable, it is irrelevant. Even if we are predestined to do things,
we cannot know what that thing is until we actually do them. For us, it
doesn't matter if the future is predetermined or is undecided; we won't
know either way. You might *think* you are destined to change the world,
and so lie on the couch all day waiting for that to happen. That, of
course, won't help you change the world, and it might contribute a lot
to proving you thought incorrectly. We therefore have no choice to be
reject predesination/determisn, and try our hardest to do what we want,
because this will give us the best "chance" of getting there. Even if
the chance has always been none.

So do I believe in predestination? No. It's not provable, and since we
can't use it to do other things, it's not helpful either (accept in
faith). Kinda like the [existance of
God](http://justinnhli.blogspot.com/2008/02/dinner-table-conversations.html),
actually, now I think about it.

