Title: Prizes in Education
Date: 2009-03-11 05:00
Slug: prizes-in-education

The New York Times recently had an article about [how rewards influence
student
behavior](http://www.nytimes.com/2009/03/03/health/03rewa.html?pagewanted=all).
It basically revolves around the debate of whether extrinsic rewards can
diminish intrinsic rewards. The fear is that, if students are used to
getting prizes for doing well in tests, then their only purpose in doing
well is to get those prizes. When the prizes are no longer given out (as
in real life), then students don't work as hard. Another problem that
was presented is that even if students are getting prizes, students
getting a small prize might feel that he was punished, comparatively,
and therefore have less motivation to try as hard.

Before I take a side in this debate, I want to say that prizes can
sometimes be extremely helpful. [Peter
Diamandis](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Peter_Diamandis), the founder
and chairman of the [X Prize
Foundation](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/X_Prize_Foundation), [gave a
talk](http://fora.tv/2008/09/12/Peter_Diamandis-Long-Term_X_Prizes)
about prizes as motivation at the Long Now Foundation, from which I've
[quoted before](http://justinnhli.com/posts/2009/02/quotes.html). A
[summary](http://blog.longnow.org/2008/09/15/peter-diamandis-long-term-x-prizes/)
is also available. His basic thesis is that having a substantial prize
encourages competition, and the aim of getting that prize motivates the
economy as a whole to spend more than that amount. The result of that
extra spending is a growth spurt in that industry. This was done with
[commercial flight](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Orteig_Prize), and more
recently as a result of Diamandis' work, [space
tourism](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ansari_X_Prize).

How, then, will the introduction of prizes as rewards for students work?
Diamandis stressed that prizes need to be "at the intersection of
audacity and achievability". In principal, it seems that prizes will
have the same effects on students as on market competitors. Students
will work harder to get the prize, thus increasing the output of the
classroom (the "market") at a much lower cost. And I think this *is* the
case.

The problem is that, unlike industry where once the technology develops
everyone benefits in the long term, in the classroom both the students
and the environment change, and only benefit in the short term. The team
that won the Ansari X Prize will continue to have funding for their
work, because now they have caught the attention of the media, the
government, and various other groups. For a student who gets the highest
score in a test though, there is no similar future motivation. Once the
test is over, the motivation is lost, and the student goes back to the
level he was pushing himself before.

Then there's the problem of the [overjustification
effect](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Overjustification_effect%20%20):
when people are given external rewards for doing something, this reduces
their internal motivation to do that. For example, let's say for
participation in a reading program, one student is given some money as a
reward. Another reads the same books outside of the program, and gets no
reward. Who do you think enjoys the reading more? Probably the latter
child - the first one comes to believe that he is reading for the money
and not for enjoyment.

Why doesn't this happen with the X Prize? Because the teams *chose* to
enter that competition. If I told a group of engineers that they have to
build an orbit capable aircraft, they probably won't be too happy, even
if they are astronautical engineers. The very purpose of the X Prize is
to lure people who may not otherwise be interested in a problem. This is
a very intuitive effect, and yet in schools this is often ignored.
Everyone in the class is competing for the prize, regardless of whether
you want to or not.

So how to best use prizes? First, they should only be used when the
motivation is not high enough. If a student likes to read, there's no
reason to reward him - his enjoyment from reading is enough to keep him
at it, and rewarding him risks making him lost interest. Second, when
prizes are offered, they should be voluntary. Sure, there may be
students who are not motivated and won't join the competition, but if
they are not impressed by the reward they're not going to try hard even
if they were *in* the competition. The prize is to help motivate those
on the border, who, given just the right nudge, might become
intrinsically motivated.

There is one final facet I want to address. The prizes should be for
tangible and useful results. More specifically, prizes *should not be
used for tests*. With the debate on going about whether the SATs and
GREs measure real education or test taking skills, it would be a great
mistake to reward someone for being an excellent test taker. Tests are
[only
proxies](http://justinnhli.com/posts/2007/11/turing-test-and-proxies-for.html)
to measure the amount of learning. The prizes should instead be awarded
based on how much extra effort someone put in. A presentation about what
you learned in class is good, but the presentation which shows the
student read more outside class, did some of his own experiements, is
the one worthy of the prize.

