Title: Rational People
Date: 2009-02-18 06:00
Slug: rational-people

I'm one of the least emotional people you'll know.

Things others often find sentimental value in, such as their country or
[race](http://justinnhli.com/posts/2008/12/big-race_19.html), I find
nothing appealing at all. I don't enjoy much fiction, the rousing drama
in the plot, and would rather read a good non-fiction book explaining
some part of nature I don't yet understand. I think about crossing the
street in terms of game theoretic dominating strategies, and see the
world as high if not totally deterministic (but of course that doesn't
change anything).

From all this, I would like to think that I am a totally rational
person, although of course I am not. My way of thinking, though, does
make me a little strange to people who don't know me. It also frustrates
people who argue with me, who tend to have not as good a grasp of logic.
With that in mind, I decided to take Sociology of Religion partially
with the mindset of understanding humans. As with Kahneman and Tversky,
I wanted to understand the irrationality and cognitive biases which lead
people to religion - because I can see no logic behind it at all... sort
of. This will be the topic of another post.

As I've done the reading and interviewed people for the course, I slowly
realized that people are not in religion because of the theology, or
whether it makes sense that God did this and this at such and such a
time. While Obama had a [favorite
philosopher/theologian](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reinhold_Niebuhr#Influence_and_honors),
how many other people do? Well, I do - Bertrand Russell. And I have
actually given this thought, having previously been a great admirer of
Socrates. But people like me are in the minority - most just don't care
if their religion is logically consistent.

As my professor has been emphasizing in in class, religion for the
majority of Americans is about identity and community. People are in
religion for the emotional appeal - they feel a sense of belonging, a
sense of purpose. This can be influenced by one's culture, race,
ethnicity, family, and a multitude of other things, but chances are
logic is not one of them. I think if people had grown up differently,
perhaps in a different culture or in a different family, they would be
equally convinced of another religion.

Now, before you say nasty things, let me clarify: I'm not saying that
this is bad or inferior. It's just that I've always thought of religion
as a logical choice - see which theology best describe the world, then
that's the one to believe in. Until this quarter I've never thought
about religion in emotional terms; it has always been a sub branch of
philosophy. Just as the ancient Greek philosophy of the four [classical
elements](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Classical_element) (fire, water,
air, earth) has been discarded, I thought people would choose the most
accurate theology and stick with that, too. This course has taught me
that there is a sociological and psychological side to religion.

I have, in other words, made the same error as classical game theorists
and economists: I assumed that people are rational. People are not
rational, and the biggest proof of this is that people can hold logical
inconsistencies in religion, even when confronted with them. Another
note to the religious: I am actually not that hard to convince - you
just need undeniable scientific evidence that God exists. Clergymen who
repeatably parts the Red Sea, for example, would be a good one, or
perhaps the laying on of hands which has a high probability of curing
cancer or AIDS.

I'm beginning to think that I might learn more about myself from a
well-defined, well understood, entirely rational AI.

