Title: Reflections on Teaching
Date: 2009-08-29 21:02
Author: justinnhli
Slug: reflections-on-teaching

I’m not sure when it became apparent to me that liked teaching. I
remember helping other people with math and biology back in ninth grade,
but I don’t think I had that much self-understanding at the time. I
helped with some (in reality, a minimal amount) of peer tutoring in high
school through the math center, where students can drop in and ask
questions about their math work. Not too many students used that though,
and I maybe helped three students in the two years I was there. Freshman
year in college, I was a student in the Gateway Science Workshop (GSW)
peer tutoring program at Northwestern. I think that was the first time I
really woke up to the idea that I want to teach. I remember that my
facilitator was really not very good at the whole facilitation thing,
and often I would be explaining things to other people in the session,
if other people were there at all. I stayed in the program because I was
bored (the things boredom make you do!), and I stayed with the same
facilitator because it was easy (the things comfort makes you do!). But
by the last quarter of that year, I had made up enough of my mind to
apply to be a GSW facilitator next year, which I got.

For the next three years, I was first a facilitator, then a senior
facilitator, and finally just filling in sessions as necessary. This
means I’ve been involved with the program for all four years of college,
and of course I did two summers of CTY as well. In the next two weeks I
will be a Graduate Student Instructor (GSI) at Michigan, my “fourth”
year of teaching.

It is therefore unfortunate that this last year, if not more, of GSW was
horrible.

By this statement I don’t mean that I grew to hate GSW, or indeed that
GSW was something I had to tolerate. No, I still enjoyed every session
of GSW; I just wasn’t convinced my students enjoyed it. When I think
back over successive years of GSW, I can see that I have gotten
complacent about teaching and have relaxed how I think about it. Let me
give some examples.

Although the GSW facilitator orientation at the start of the year
recommends doing ice breakers during the first session (or two) of each
quarter, I gave up doing those around the middle of junior year. During
the first year of GSW, I had a couple students follow me for the entire
year. Since students can get priority to follow the same facilitator
through the school year, this means that the students found what I said
useful. I had some students join me the second quarter, who stayed for
the final quarter too. But each quarter there were also new students,
and so despite it being awkward for the people who I already know and
who already know each other, I continued to do ice breakers. The second
year, no one from my first quarter stayed, but a number from my second
quarter stayed for the third. I didn’t intend to skip ice breakers – I
remember coming prepared to do them, but there were only two students in
the first session of the quarter, and it seemed silly to do games with
just two people.

I could blame the decreasing number of students in GSW for that, but
while that does contribute to the situation, it is my attitude which
changed. Simply put, I became more focused on what an ideal session is
like than on how to foster such an ideal session. For peer tutoring (and
I think teaching in general), it’s best if the students talk to each
other and exchange ideas. Not because there’s a barrier, however small,
between facilitator and student, but also because students are much
closer in mindset than the facilitator. Sharing how they approach
problems allows everyone to reformulate the question, and perhaps find a
perspective which helps them most easily understand. And therefore, in
an ideal session (I remember I had one absolutely perfect session back
in my first year), the facilitator mostly listens while the students
teach each other, only stepping in if everyone is stuck.

My mistake is that I allowed my non-participation become status quo,
without adapting to whether the students were discussion. This turns
what should be a discussion into something worse than a lecture – it
turns into a self study. I forgot that getting that initial engagement
takes work, and an ice breaker – even if it seems silly – is part of
that work. Instead of leading the students through problems until they
have developed the confidence to discuss among themselves, I have just
been letting them work.

I just finished Ken Bain’s What the Best College Teachers Do, and while
it wasn’t a ten point plan to better teaching (which would have been
bound to failure), I did get some insight into what I’ve been
neglecting. The main thing I learned is that even though you may be
going through the same motions, your relationship with you students
depends as your attitude as well, and without that the same motion just
doesn’t work. My personal example of that is offering to stay after the
session to help. The first year, I’ve had students ask me more questions
afterwards, and that had led me to know more about them and their
background as well. Lately though, although I still make the same offer,
no students take me up on it. This is because I haven’t gained their
trust (note: this is different from them not trusting me enough). When I
started GSW, I cared a lot more about what the students are thinking and
how they are feeling about the material and the session itself. In my
personal journal I have written short evaluations of the students after
the first couple sessions, noting how they’re reacting to me, and how I
can draw them out more. I actually cared about their answer to the
customary “how was your week?” – it wasn’t just a greeting, but a
semi-serious attempt to know more about the students. This mutual
understanding and trust, although not reflected in the students’
attendance records or grades, paves the way to the autonomous learning I
described.

The other big mistake I made is not leading them through the questions
anymore. This applies whether or not that trust is established, although
if the students are actively discussion the problem at hand it is more
permissible to step back. What I realized is that talking them through
the question (note: not through the solution) shows them more than how
to arrive at the answer. It also shows them how to approach these types
of questions, and what kind of thinking the student is supposed to have.
After all, the material is only part of what we care about as teachers.
Equally as important, if not more so, is that the students can think
within the discipline. For computer science, for example, that means the
ability to break down a complex procedure into simple steps, evaluating
whether that solution is cost-effective, and so on. For Newtonian
mechanics, that means seeing the forces acting on objects and knowing
how the forces interact. Whether they can use big-O descriptions or
integral calculus to find the answer is something else, but getting that
thinking there takes precedence. If I lead the students through the
question, letting them make mistakes and questioning them on why their
solution does or does not work, I am changing ever so slightly the way
they see the world.

The last mistake I made, this one somewhat less apparent but equally
influential, is that I stopped thinking about what the students are
learning. This seems silly, especially since GSW has all the worksheets
made for us. But without a goal, without consciously trying to lead the
students into the way of thinking, it is too easy to simply go for the
answers. I am robbing the students of their opportunity to look at the
larger questions. Again, it’s not the questions on the worksheet which
are the most important, but the concepts behind it. The successful
completion of the worksheet is merely a proxy to what the students
learned. Bain brought up studies where the students can ace a Newtonian
physics final, but still hold some naive, intuitive beliefs about
motion. Part of it is certainly how the final was designed, but part of
it (a larger part, I would argue) is that the teacher has not thought
about how to bring it above just plugging and chugging.

If I had to summarize Bain’s book in one sentence, it’s this: The goal
of teaching is for students to not just learn the material, but to
understand it’s implications. This necessarily means changing (or at
least adding to) how students think. Ways of thinking, unfortunately,
are pretty resistant to change, and so to accomplish that the teacher
needs to be prepared. I want to give three examples of good teaching,
all of which I have personally experienced as a TA to the course.

The first is from CTY, where once a week during lunch my instructor will
give a student a dollar if they can give the pronunciation and meaning
of a word (limited to a collegiate dictionary) which he couldn’t spell.
The result is that the day before and the day of, the students will
spend a lot of their free time looking at a dictionary. Think about it:
if a teacher’s job, in general, is to spark people’s desire to learn,
then he has achieved this beyond measure. No children of twelve will
willingly spend hours looking at a dictionary, but giving them this
challenge drives them to do so. Whether they learned anything by looking
at the dictionary is arguable, but it did inspire an educational fervor.

The second example is from compilers. The professor consistently brought
up books and papers which were not included in the textbook. These books
were not necessarily related to compilers, although they were all
relevant to the topic under discussion at the time. This has the same
effect as the spelling challenge – it draws the students deeper in to
the subject, while making them aware of the larger context of what
they’re studying. The best thing is that, at least for me, I really get
the sense that the professor is really bringing up the books because he
wants to invite the students to share his curiosity and interest in
those subjects, and not just to impress students by how much he knows.

The last example is by the same professor. I mentioned that exams and
most homework being just a proxy to measure how much a student
understands. So the “final” for the compilers course (in addition to a
working compiler, of course), instead of being a paper, was a “code
walk”. That means the student/group comes in to meet the professor for
an hour, during which the student walks the professor through their
code. This is done in an informal fashion – it’s not a powerpoint
presentation – but it allows the student to let the professor know, with
the highest “bandwidth” possible, what they have learned. And although
there are “points” awarded through the quarter for sections of a
finished compiler, that merely influences the final grade. If a student
did poorly before, but have improved as the quarter went on (each
assignment is cumulative, and previous test cases are run again) with
the final result of presenting a well organized code walk at the end,
then they get a good grade. That is, the students are graded on what
they understand, both about compilers and about programming in general,
and not just whether they can answer questions about compilers in
general.

So to put this into practice, I’m writing my own CTY robotics curriculum
(like I did <a>last year</a>) with all this in mind. I will post the
result here when I’m done. To close though, I want to pull a totally
unrelated quote. I feel this should be how assignments given to students
should be viewed, as Stanford University president John Hennessy said
(as quoted in Thomas Friedman's Hot, Flat, and Crowded):

> A series of great opportunities disguised as insoluble [read:
> intriguing] problems

