Title: Religious and Scientific Domains of Inquiry
Date: 2009-01-02 06:00
Author: justinnhli
Slug: religious-and-scientific-domains-of-inquiry

I want to write something short about the difference between religious
and scientific domains of inquiry.

Sciences aims to expand our knowledge of the world, which I think we all
agree is a good and necessary thing. There is however a restriction:
this knowledge must be repeatably testable in controlled experiments.
This means that there are things slightly outside the reach of science:
the existence of unicorns, for example. Although we can say with
extremely high probability that unicorns don't exist, science cannot
*prove* that they don't. With unicorns it's easier, since we inhibit the
same environment as they do. With beings like God, it's a lot harder to
say whether He exists or not.

That's where religion comes in. Besides telling people that God exists
and is loving and good, religion also tells us that God wants us to
treat others kindly, to respect other people's properties, and so on. As
with the existance of God, there is no morality in nature, and thus no
truth to find. Religion or philosophy or something similar is needed to
give us direction as to how we should act, and what our purpose in life
is.

The problem, in my opinion, arises when religion talks about the natural
world - claiming that animals did not evolve, for example. There is
clear evidence which supports evolution, and science offers the better
explanation of these processes than religious texts. Other similar
topics include the possibility of a world wide flood, dividing the Red
Sea, and so on. Just as science cannot offer much in terms of morality,
religion is lacking in its explanation of natural phenomenon.

This shows that religion and science actually have mutually exclusive
domains, and hence my problem (if I have one; I'm still deciding) with
religion does not come from science, but from something else.

