Title: Second Person Game
Date: 2008-02-22 03:24
Author: justinnhli
Slug: second-person-game

This seems like one of those things a genius would wonder about, and so
here I am, trying to be a genius.

What would a second person game be like?

We've all heard of first and third person games. These descriptions
refer to the perspective the player is given: either as the protagonist,
or as a disembodied camera following the protagonist. Second person,
however, would imply that the user takes the perspective of not the
protagonist, but someone would would refer to the protagonist as "you".

Taking this definition more broadly first, there are several types of
media which currently addresses the protagonist as you. The more well
known are those "choose-your-own-adventures" book. Translating that into
a game would make it similar to a God game, where you provide all the
opportunities for the computer-controlled characters, and watch what
they do. Since there are multiple paths through the story (one would
hope), it would be ideal if you can somehow configure the protagonists,
giving them traits and attributes which will then be used to decide
which path through the story they take.

The game will therefore be much closer to writing a piece of interactive
fiction than any conventional game. This in fact is also a good
description of the second type of existing media: the role of a dungeon
master in table top role playing games. The concept is the same, except
this time it's other people who are controlling the protagonists, while
the "player" controls the story telling, the NPCs, and pretty much
everything else in the game.

Taking this concept further, a second person game is a game where the
player controls everything <span style="font-style:italic;">but</span>
the protagonist. Technically it will only be "second person" if the
player controls an animate object (since otherwise it will be third
person), but it is still an intriguing idea.

My final question is, what kind of story could this format tell? I could
imagine the player being mean, and denying everything the protagonist
asks for. For the protagonist to succeed though, the player would have
to keep giving ground, or at the very least play a very
supporting/passive role. It would certainly be very strange.

What prevents the character(s) the player is controlling from turning
into the protagonist?

