Title: Survival of the Fittest
Date: 2008-01-12 01:56
Slug: survival-of-the-fittest

This topic has been sitting in my drafts folder for over a month now,
but a [recent NYTimes
article](http://bits.blogs.nytimes.com/2008/01/11/god-and-small-things/)
("God and Small Things" by Barnaby J. Feder) gave me a different angle
to draw this topic in.

Over the past year, my thoughts about some of the biggest problems the
world is facing (nuclear proliferation, global warming, petroleum
production, etc) inevitably go back to the same thought: I don't care.
This is not an "I don't care" because it doesn't affect me (which is
more or less my views of politics), but an "I don't care" because I
don't consider it a problem.

I'd imagine a lot of people will take issue with my previous statement,
but let me explain. I'll start with the problem that has the least
effect.

Nuclear proliferation is a strange sort of issue, because it's effect is
so small. The attack on Hiroshima kill about half a million people,
including deaths from burns, radiation, and related diseases, but not
including deaths from cancer within 10 years. On the other hand, the
2003 "invasion" of Iraq has killed about 1.2 million Iraqis. Certainly,
nuclear weapons are more dangerous than conventional attacks (for
example, the attack on the twin towers which killed about 3000), but it
is still a one time attack. Only a small portion of the population of
the world is affected, and while it will change global politics, most
people's way of life will not change.

The lack of petroleum is a slightly larger issue. Since there is only so
much petroleum on earth, and our rate of extraction is much much higher
than the rate of petroleum production in nature, all the usable oil will
be used up in the near future, whether that's 100 years or 500 years.
What are the consequences of not having petroleum? Well, it will be
harder to get around, for sure. There won't be quite so many cars,
planes or ships going around, and for those which still do go around, it
will cost a lot more to get on them. In reaction, people will develop or
put into more common use alternate sources of energy: nuclear, electric,
biochemical (that is, human powered). There will be a period when these
technologies are being developed, but in another 100 or 500 years power
will not be a problem anymore. So really, the lack of oil is not so much
a long term threat, than a warning that we should be switching to more
sustainable forms of energy.

Global warming, on the other hand, has much larger impact. The affects
of global warming might be felt even a million years from now, and it
not only changes the way humans live, but also all plants and animals on
earth. A large number of species may well become extinct from the rapid
change in temperature, and it's also possible that a significant portion
of humans will die too.

Here's the reason why I'm still calling it a small problem, and it will
probably give more insight into what I'm saying about the previous two
issues as well: even with global warming, <span
style="font-weight:bold;">life will continue</span>. Note that I didn't
say "my life will continue," or that "the life of people I know will
continue." For that matter, I didn't even say "human life will
continue."

Yes, that's right. I'm a lot more interested in the general survival of
life than the survival of <span style="font-style:italic;">human</span>
life. Of course, since the survival of life encompasses more than the
survival of humans, it deserves more attention. That's not quite how I
feel; in fact, I feel more than a little apathetic about the survival of
any particular species. Certainly, it will be a loss, but nothing that
the phenomenon of can't withstand.

Let's go back to global warming for a moment. There are already species
of plants and animals, cultures of humans living in the deserts and the
tropics. An over-simplification this may be, the region these animals
and cultures live in will just be expanded and/or moved north and south.
These regions will remain habitable by these creatures and humans, and
so life will continue.

This detachment from small entities extends beyond life, to other human
constructs as well. That may be part of the reason I don't join cultural
student associations, or college democrats or republicans, or perhaps
even environmental groups. Cultural and political groups have a clearly
narrow focus, and similarly I don't actively support Northwestern's
various teams. If I display interest in someone else's Northwestern
background, I feel it has more to do with the coincidence than pride. As
for environmental groups, I've always felt that those groups are
misnamed; they are not so much saving the environment than advocating a
different way of using it. The environment doesn't need saving and it
will survive regardless of what humans do (unless we actively destroy
it, of course).

On the other hand, I invest time in science, maths, and philosophy. All
three have to do with understanding the world around us, to discover
hidden relationships in nature. While science and maths have practical
applications, philosophy is more abstract. They are all, however, longer
lasting than the study of politics. I do have a little interest in
psychology and other social sciences, although one can argue they are
much more limited in scope than the others.

After I read the NYTimes article mentioned at the beginning of this
post, I read the Nature article mentioned, and then a few Wikipedia
articles on transhumanism. That gave the realization that I've never
contemplated how this philosophy extends to the future. Since I don't
care too much about the human race, it is perhaps not surprising that I
have nothing against biotechnological or cybernetic modification of
human beings. Sidestepping the question of whether there is such a thing
as "human nature", I don't think it's something sacred or above
alteration.

In fact, as a student of computer science and believing that artificial
intelligence will one day rise above human intelligence, I don't even
mind if humans are taken over by machines. By "take over" I don't mean a
violent suppression - while this exposition may portray me as unfeeling,
I'm not completely amoral - but I mean I'm not against machines being
the superior "race". I care more about general superior intelligence
than I do about human intelligence, and if it takes creation to bolster
evolution, then that will be the case.

I am previously aware of most of my views expressed here, but this is
the first time I've connected them all with the theme of a detachment
from smaller, concrete objects. I wonder where this detachment grew
from.

