Title: Synesthesia
Date: 2009-05-11 05:00
Author: justinnhli
Slug: synesthesia

Last week's question: how do people with grapheme-color synesthesia
perceive ambigrams?

I talked to [a friend](http://jrscheung.deviantart.com/) who has
graphame-color synesthesia, and did some "testing" with her. The results
are at once unexpected and intuitive.

As she said in a comment for last week's post, the color all depends on
the recognition of the letter. For normal text, even if the letters are
upside-down, the colors would still be associated with them as long as
they are legible. It makes sense, therefore, when she looks at an
ambigram, the "color" of the letters change according to which
interpretation she has in mind. If she consciously reads the ambigram
upside-down, the letters will have those colors.

Getting to the heart of my question, the letters change color abruptly.
If anything, there is a middle ground where she doesn't recognize the
letters at all, and there is no color associated with the scribble. This
is more clearly demonstrated when I showed her an unfamiliar ambigram
sideways. Although she recognized one letter, the other were just
scribbles to her, and so they remained black. Even after seeing the
ambigram with the oriented correctly, when shown it sideways again it
stills remains black, unless she tilts her head. She can't seem to get
two colors appear with one glyph at the same time, like how in my
[favorite optical
illusion](http://www.maniacworld.com/Spinning-Silhouette-Optical-Illusion.html)
it's hard to see the ballerina turning both ways at once.

The answer which I didn't know I wanted was that the color comes after
recognition. It is not like the brain sees some lines, puts a color to
it *first*, before the person recognizes it to be a letter. Rather, even
if the person knows it's a letter, if the glyph is transformed (in this
case, rotation and/or merged with other lines to form a different
letter) and the person forces themselves to see just some scribbles,
then the "letter" loses its color.

Personally, I'm intrigued by synesthesia, because of how it explicitly
connects two unconnected stimuli. On some high level it works the same
way as those leaps logic that people can do to get an unintuitive but
effective solution. And sometimes, I wish I am a synesthete just so I
can have that experience.

This week's question: a number of networks have "court tv" programs,
where a prosecutor and a defendent get "tried" in front of a "judge",
usually setting some small monetary issues up to several thousand
dollars. What I want to know is, are the prosecutors and defendents
legally bond to honor that verdict? Do the networks do anything to
ensure that the money/goods changes hands? Or is this all just another
"reality tv" show?

