Title: The Future
Date: 2007-11-06 06:45
Author: justinnhli
Slug: the-future

Minority Report has been on my mind lately, probably because of that
[Engadget
post](http://www.engadget.com/2007/10/21/suns-spot-a-poor-mans-minority-report-interface/)
about motion controlled computers. Here's what it looks like [in the
movie](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZqPWUnaBNSA). My thought on it, by
the way, is that the detection anchor should be mounted on the torso, so
only the movement of the hands relative to the body are counted, but not
the entire person walking. Alternatively, maybe there can be some sort
of face recognition, so the system can calculate where the eyes are and
use that vector to determine which object to move.

Anyway, thinking about Minority Report led me to other time discrepancy
movies, like The Lake House, which ended with a discussion between my
friends about whether the movie can be fitted into the physics
understanding of time. Our conclusion was that it can't, for reasons I
don't really feel like going into.

A more interesting movie though, which I think has more implications for
time "travel" of sorts, is The Jacket. For most things, The Jacket has a
more consistent overall timeline than The Lake House does. All the
information Adrian Brody's character needed he got from the future, from
the person he then went back and told that same information to. Which,
although circular, only results in one timeline.

The interesting part of the movie is how he "changed the future" through
his actions. In theory this is the same thing as what happened in The
Lake House: some information was sent back to the past, which changed
the future. The reason why The Lake House causes problems is that we
don't only follow one character, but two characters whose past doesn't
change. Sandra Bullock's character first experiences the car crash, then
tells Keanu Reeves' character about it, which eventually leads to the
crash not happening. But then what happened to the memory of the crash?
It remains, and here lies the dilemma: you can't have a memory of
something which didn't happen.

How did The Jacket get around that? Simple: Kiera Knightney's character
didn't keep the memory. After the future is changed, she does not have
any memories of what happened before at all. Instead, we see her
starting afresh, at the same location as where we first saw her in the
future. Hence you can say that the future was sent down another branch
entirely, not kept on the same branch but changed the middle.

What about Adrian Brody's memory? Well, the film never actually shows
his time line past his death. It is not the case that these two time
lines meet, but that his was cut into pieces, and a few of these pieces
were placed in the future. Therefore, when he is in the future, he does
not have knowledge of what happened to him in the "past" (that is, after
he was pulled out of the morgue drawer for that particular trip). Which,
again, allows the film to maintain internal consistency.

So that's one reason why I like The Jacket more. And I suppose I should
credit my attraction to [random and slightly awkward
romances](http://ninghui48.blogspot.com/2007/09/confession.html).

