Title: The Turing Test and Proxies for Intelligence
Date: 2007-11-09 19:39
Author: justinnhli
Slug: the-turing-test-and-proxies-for-intelligence

In my language class, we have been talking about how to get at some
abstract properties of language, such as the reading level of a document
or the level of technical detail, and what shortcuts we can take to find
these properties without needing the machine to fully understand natural
language. These shortcuts are usually in the form of proxies, something
which "speaks" for something else. For example, the amount of latin
words in a document might be a good approximation of the level of
technical detail in it. Certainly, it is not a perfect approximation (or
it would be called a "calculation"), but it's a much cheaper and easier
way of getting an answer, especially when compared to building a full
language parser with knowledge base.

Then halfway through all this stuff, I realized something: that the
Turing test is actually using conversation as a proxy for intelligence.

Isn't that interesting? Normally when I think of the Turing test, I
think about the machine fooling humans, Eliza, sentence substitution,
etc. Somehow in talking about Turing test I forget that it was supposed
to be a test of intelligence for machines. Looking at the Turing test as
an estimation of intelligence immediately raises an obvious question: is
it a good estimation? How well does the Turing test actually represent
intelligent behavior?

Then again, what is intelligence? As you might have guessed, the
definition of intelligence has been in debate for a long time. For
example, the following definition was signed by 52 intelligence workers:

<dl>
<dd>
a very general mental capability that, among other things, involves the
ability to reason, plan, solve problems, think abstractly, comprehend
complex ideas, learn quickly and learn from experience. It is not merely
book learning, a narrow academic skill, or test-taking smarts. Rather,
it reflects a broader and deeper capability for comprehending our
surroundingsâ€”"catching on", "making sense" of things, or "figuring out"
what to do.

</dd>
</dl>
That definition, however, seems to say more about what intelligence is
not than what it is.

Of course, the reason we have the Turing test in the first place is
because intelligence is an extremely slippery creature to catch. No one
can really define what intelligence is, and it's even harder to measure
it. While the Turing test using conversations as a proxy, there are
other proxies as well which are in use.

Example: the SATs. Even though now the letters don't stand for anything
(according to Wikipedia), at one point it was supposed to test for the
intelligence of its takers. The question is, how well does questions of
analogy, math, reading, and writing serve as proxies for intelligence?
The SATs do not seem to fit any of the capabilities ("among other
things") as defined above, maybe except the ability to reason.

Another commonly mentioned proxy for intelligence is the Intelligence
Quotient, or IQ. Again, simply because it claims to measure
intelligence, it has a considerable amount of criticism against it. I
have never taken an IQ test before, and so cannot sat anything about the
fields it covers. It would seem to me, however, that any sort of test
which can be administrated in any fashion would neglect some form of
intelligence found in the real world.

I don't know if any of language, SATs, or IQ are good proxies for
intelligence. I personally think that intelligence has to observing the
environment, learning to adapt to it, and applying knowledge to affect
the world. I don't think this is any more specific or scientifically
testable than the definition above though.

I dare say I am not intelligent enough to think of a better definition.

