Title: The Supertheory of Evolution
Date: 2008-02-25 21:18
Author: justinnhli
Slug: the-supertheory-of-evolution

I recently started reading Richard Dawkins' The Selfish Gene. While
Dawkins is a very prominent , outspoken atheist, I did not in fact pick
up the book because of that. I have talked about wanting to model the
evolution of morals, or in a less ambitious sense, model the evolution
of altruism. The article I had referenced before mentioned Dawkins'
book, and that's why I picked it up.

I'm not too far in (I've been busy doing other stuff since), but very
early on Dawkins talks about a more general theory, which is an abstract
of the theory of evolution as proposed by Darwin. Dawkins proposed that
"evolution" can also be applied to inanimate, static objects, like
molecules. The more stable a molecule, the more often it will appear in
nature, and so in this way it "guarantees" its survival.

I've been thinking about the concept since I read it on Friday, and I'm
still mulling over it today. In a way it makes perfect sense, that the
goal of evolution is merely to ensure saturation of an object in nature.
At the same time, it's hard to apply the word evolution to molecules,
when there is no goal, no object, and arguably no form of competition.

I think one concept which has kept me from fully wrapping my head around
Dawkins supertheory is that I tend to think of evolution as one thing
being "better" than another. Rather, my definition of better is very
strictly defined by active competition - for food, territory, ability to
avoid predators, etc. Therefore, in animal evolution, the stronger,
faster, louder, better camouflaged species wins.

With molecules, however, there is still a sense of one being better than
the other, but it's a very objective one. It almost seems like a
circular argument to say that something is better if it is more
pervasive. My common sense tells me that it's reversing the cause and
effect - it will appear more in nature only if it's better, and it is it
being better than causes it to appear more in nature. Seeing that
statement though, if the "if" is changed to an "if and only if", then it
makes logical sense to reverse the two.

Now I think of it, this seems to make much sense in the business world.
The brand which is more pervasive is the better one. What is interesting
to me is that it would imply some moral standard - since there is a
fairly standardized set of morals, it would mean that these morals are
"better", or at least more stable", than others.

Which again makes sense. Curious.

