Title: The Problem Science Has with Jesus Christ
Date: 2008-03-06 16:30
Slug: the-problem-science-has-with-jesus-christ

I came across this story multiple times in the past few days. First on
Facebook, then on some other site I was reading (forgot what it was).
Here's a [copy of
it](http://www.denouden.ca/2008/03/04/the-absence-of-god/).

The first thing I want to say is - the professor should be fired, for
the way he treats his students. You should never, ever single out a
student like that, especially when talking about such a sensitive
subject. I think a number of people would cry if confronted this way.

Even if the professor was nicer, so this conversation happened between
two friends, the professor is still not very good at his job. Science is
more than simple perception, but is a way of understanding the world.
Barring the skeptic position of not accepting the senses or the external
world, perception is certainly one of the main ways we gain knowledge of
the world around us. That does not mean, however, that it is the <span
style="font-style:italic;">only</span> way of doing so.

There are certain things which we cannot perceive - electrons, energy,
black holes - but which we nonetheless believe exist. In terms of
perception, these objects are equal with God. What these objects (or
rather, the theories about these objects) has over the concept of God is
how they allow us to predict the future. We can manipulate electrons to
power all our appliances. Black holes are what logically exists in the
center of galaxies, which provide the gravitational acceleration to hold
the galaxy together. Energy is simply a way to measure the way things
move, or more abstractly entropy; with it we know how far a plane can
fly, how long and at what angle runaway ramps should be. These objects
can be used to predict how wires, stars, and cars will react.

The real problem science has with God is that it doesn't offer any
predictions. Certainly God may have created the universe, and
intelligently designed everything in it, but that doesn't tell us
anything about what will happen in the next minute. In this way, God
shares properties with other imaginary objects, like unicorns and
fairies; certainly we can argue they exist but are not perceivable, but
that doesn't do us any good.

Back to the debate, the student did a very good job of arguing. Would
someone please make sure atheists are represented fairly next time?

