Title: The Fountainhead
Date: 2009-08-11 00:37
Author: justinnhli
Slug: the-fountainhead

I have been collecting and clarifying the thoughts I have about the book
and its concepts since I finished reading it. There is a collection of
ideas, many of which I’ve had before, some of which are new to me as
presented in the book, and some which took me till now to figure out. I
have a few things to say about my reaction first. Ayn Rand’s magnum
opus, her last novel, *Atlas Shrugged*, is supposedly a book which
[makes a difference in peoples
lives](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Atlas_shrugged#Praise_and_influence),
coming in second only to the Bible. *The Fountainhead*, written earlier
but containing the same heavy dose of what would become objectivism,
might not have as large an impact, but I still expected it to make me
question things I believe. Instead, beginning early in the novel and
continuing after I finish, I was more surprised by the fact that the
book did not change me at all. Rather, I found that I have individually
arrived at a lot of the conclusions presented in the book. There might
be a confusion of causation here; it is entirely possible that I have
read books about objectivism first, which lead me to Ayn Rand, thus me
finding the books uninspiring. The most supportive evidence I have of
this is that I’m a fan of Terry Goodkind’s *Sword of Truth* series,
which expresses a lot of objectivist philosophy. That might indeed be
how I first came across Ayn Rand. Since there was a gap of several years
before my first reading in 11^th^ grade in high school, my subsequent
discovery of the series in junior year of college, and finally reading
*The Fountainhead*, I feel this is unlikely. I would prefer to believe
that I have come to the same conclusion as Ayn Rand has, at least on the
subject of how best to live one’s life. Due to my focus on the
individual and not in society, I have the feeling that if I continue to
read *Atlas Shrugged*, I will in fact like *The Fountainhead* more. But
that’s an essay for another day.

Let me start by addressing the thoughts that I’ve had up to the reading
of *The Fountainhead*, then show how the thoughts are tied together by
the ideas in the book.

The first idea is one I’ve expressed for a while, [even on this
blog](http://justinnhli.blogspot.com/2009/03/smile.html): it is the idea
that work and play does not have to be separate. I just finished six
weeks of working for a summer camp, where I wake up at 07:00, spent at
least 7 hours a day with middle school kids (more often closer to 8 or
9), have to work in the evenings to prepare lessons for the next day,
and still have paper work to file. If this sounds like a horrible job,
it isn’t; I love the entire experience, and my only feeling at the end
of six weeks is a wish for *just one more* session. I may have
complained in the middle, about how the students are not getting along
with each other, or that some policy about paperwork is stupid, but
those are minor things. Compared to watching how quickly these children
can pick up material and what their minds are capable of understanding,
the things I’m complaining about are insignificant. Part of the reason I
complain is to express a moment’s frustration; the other is that
somehow, I am expected to complain.

That last one is strange, when one thinks about it. Of course, there’s
no rule saying that all employees must complain about their job. But
most people do, and it has become a ritual of bonding to talking about
jobs as such. In the same way, my parents have very often drawn the
distinction between working and play: yes, play is important, but work
more so. By the way it is phrased, it creates a false separation between
work and play, that the two can not coexist. Play is the fun one, but in
order to have fun one must first have fame/fortune/influence, and to get
that, one must work first, which is not fun. CTY is the greatest
counter-example to this theory. People are taking vacation time from
their normal jobs to come and teach children. The salaries are much
lower than what I could get if I do an internship at Microsoft, and the
food, accommodations, etc. are all at lower standards. But I’m not
taking the job because of the meals and wheels, but because of what I’m
paid to do. And I happen to like robotics, I happen to like teaching, I
happen to like playing frisbee with children.

In the last year or so, I’ve realized that this sets me apart in several
ways. The first, of course, is that I complain less than other people.
But more than that, I realize I spend more time being productive, being
happy. At CTY there are people who don’t want to spend time outside of
class with the children. It is not part of the job description, they
say. That’s true. But the very nature of the job involves spending hours
with the kids. If they didn’t like kids, why did they take the job? The
real reason is probably more subtle than that; I’m sure everyone at the
camp liked children. In my case though, I’m taking time out of my own
life, when I’m not “on duty”, to do more “job work”. The distinction
between work and play is blurred: I do the same thing whether I’m paid
or not. In things besides summer jobs there’s a difference – I would
have to work a part-time job to support myself, I would have to worry
about time and transport and all that stuff. But it’s a start. Paul
Graham suggested that [the test of whether someone is doing what they
love is asking them whether they would continue doing that if they
weren’t paid](http://www.paulgraham.com/love.html). I would do CTY; in
fact, I did. Living in a dorm, my address changed during the summer, so
I never got the last check which was mailed out (the others were
collected in person). In essence I was paid only two thirds of what I
signed up for. I didn’t know until this summer that there was a third
paycheck. But I didn’t care, I came back; I didn’t do it for the
paycheck, I did it for the sake of doing it.

The second idea I want to address is one that was on the waiting list to
become a blog post. There are two related ideas: an arrogance and
over-confidence that I sometimes show, and a condescension for people
who don’t try.

I recently noted to a friend that arrogance and being full of oneself is
different: the former usually has something to be proud of, but they are
overly so, while the latter may not in fact have any accomplishments. I
believe my arrogance comes from several things: abilities as a quick
learner, a mental (and by extension, limited physical) resourcefulness,
a refusal to be defeated (at least emotionally), and perhaps relative
success so far in life. Because of these things I see myself as better
than other people. I’ve never really worked hard in school, but have
pretty good grades. One might object here that my definition of work is
different. That is true; I had a lot of fun in school, and part of that
fun comes from learning and understanding new things. But that just
proves my point. Being able to enjoy this required process of schooling
sets me apart. It is like I’m gaming the system, except I’m not.
Everyone can be happy at school; some just don’t know how, others refuse
to.

Wanting to learn and being curious gives me the advantage of knowing a
lot, not just in my major, but also in things outside my major. Here
again I clash with convention. Look at lists of 100 must read books.
Count how many are non-fiction. I’ll bet that fiction books dominate. In
fact, back in freshman year of high school, in English we had periods
where we were required to read. There was one caveat: it had to be a
fiction book. I once tried to bring in a non-fiction book, perhaps about
physics, perhaps about dinosaurs, but it was rejected. Granted, on that
occasion I was sent to the library and thus discovered Terry Goodkind,
but I never understood why reading must focus on narratives. I find
books on science, philosophy, and sociological studies equally as
absorbing, and I don’t think that there are any more good authors in
fiction than there is in non-fiction. And from these books, I learn a
lot about other people, about how the world works, things which I can
use in my life.

As for emotional stability – not being allowed to read non-fiction in
class didn’t stop me. It just meant I had to be somewhat less efficient.
I write journals, blogs, debates on philosophy, which helps me get rid
of any bottled-up emotions. I’m the kind of person who would be happy in
many situations, even if things are not working out they way I want them
to. One question I’ve always hated on the “getting to know you” type
games is one which asks for things you regret. I tend not to have them.
I’m sure if I plan now and act, I can be just as happy, if not more so.
Wallowing in despair is not going to help anyone, and you’re in charge
of your own emotions. That doesn’t mean I don’t have goals or that I
just let things happen to me. It’s the same way I deal with grades. If
I’m doing well, then I’ll care about them; if I’m not, well, I’m still
learning material.

Although I’ve been aware of these things about myself for several years
now, sometimes I’m still surprised when I see other people don’t share
the same ideals. Being rather secure in my belief that this is the way
to being happy and productive, sometimes I just can’t bear other people
complaining about their life. Have they tried to make their life better?
Have they tried to stop complaining and act? It is perhaps not
surprising that, if they haven’t tried to make things better, things
don’t get better. This idea actually sprang from a discussion about
search engines. We were talking about having additional power operators,
like the negation of a search term or searching only pages on a site.
Other people in the discussion were saying that these functionalities
should be provided, maybe by adding buttons, sliders, etc. I argued that
these functions already exist (indeed, [Google has
them](http://www.google.com/support/websearch/bin/answer.py?hl=en&answer=136861)),
and people are just not taking the time to learn them. The conclusion
that the class had about me was that I’m a power user, and I don’t
understand how the “average user” works. On reflection though, I think
the difference might be wider still: I believe in doing what is possible
to get things done. Where is the line drawn between people being stupid
and the object of use being badly designed? As a Linux user, I subscribe
to the philosophy of “scratching your own itch”. If you want something
in a program, either work around it, ask someone to code it for you,
code it yourself, or forget it. There is enough documentation and forums
online to solve most problems, and these solutions are only a Google
search away. People should be willing to do this much to solve their
problems; less than that, they’re just lazy. I was reminded of the
computer help desk acronym PEBKAC: Problem Exists Between Keyboard And
Chair. My personal conclusion on the matter? I shouldn’t be in human
computer interaction.

The last idea I had is one which I never intended to write about, but is
inseparable from these ideas. This idea is dedication, and I will
sidetrack into romance and love to demonstrate my point.

As I’ve said, I don’t like people who don’t try. Some people do try, but
very often I feel they don’t try enough. Although perhaps I don’t do it
for everything I do, in general I want to see things to the end. For a
project in my freshman year, I was in a team of four, except two of the
group members didn’t really do anything. So the remaining guy and I, we
worked the entire evening, through the night, and most of the next day
to get the project done on time. We’ve talked to the other two before,
and they’ve somewhat acknowledged that they haven’t pulled their weight.
We were supposed to meet the evening before to get the thing done, and
what happens? Those two don’t even bother to show up. It might be said
that this is the simplest case of dedication, that maybe half the people
my age have done something like that to get homework finished. True; but
I do this not just for homework or group projects, but also for clubs
and other activities. I don’t value sleep or food much, and would rather
see things finished than go to bed.

Let me take this into the realm of feelings. Taking to a friend
recently, I was surprised to discover that she had never felt a certain
feeling: that of loving someone so much that she would be willing to
give them away. It can be slightly paradoxical, but in the simple case
it’s easy to understand. Let’s say that my friend likes someone, but
that someone is attracted to someone else. If the happiness of the
person she loves is of such value that it is shadows the value of her
own happiness, then letting that person go actually makes her happier,
solely for the reason that that person is happier. This particular idea
has been with me since high school, so it’s strange for me to hear that
it has never occurred to other people. This is dedication: a commitment
to something – whether an ideal or a person – which goes beyond your
personal needs.

I’m not sure how well I’ve explained the ideas, but in the form they’ve
existed in my head, they’re intricately connected, although I could not
explain how. Reading *The Fountainhead* gave me ideas, but it still took
me until today to realize what it is. I summarized it this way:

> By loving what we do, we become *self-sufficient* – an unprecedented
> liberty, freedom from the judgement of others, freedom from failure –
> because it is not other people’s reactions or the result which
> matters, but the journey, the act of doing itself. By loving what we
> do, we become powerful beyond measure through the knowledge that no
> matter what happens, we are happy.

The link I was missing is the self-sufficiency. If someone loves what
they do, and are totally dedicated to it without regard to anything else
– as Howard Roark was to architecture – then they are truly happy, and
can be smugly so. This only applies to things which don’t require other
people – architecture as a personal art, or a boundary-pushing science
where politics doesn’t interfere. In these cases, it doesn’t matter what
other people think, because the goal has never been their approval. The
goal is to design, or to push the boundaries of human knowledge. That is
all that is necessary for happiness: not praise from other people, but
the internal certainty that something worthwhile has happened.

I’ve once read somewhere that a book should not be read just by virtue
of it being a classic. They should be read for their own value, and if
it turns out to be a boring book half way through, stop. I myself
skipped the last half of Thomas Friedman’s *Hot, Flat, and Crowded*
because he kept repeating himself, and also skipped Steven Pinker’s
chapter on abstract syntax in *The Language Instinct*. I’m not reading
the books because I want to say I’ve read them; I’m reading to see what
they have to say, and maybe gain a new perspective. I don’t want to
suffer hours of indecipherable babble for a single moment’s claim of
finishing the book. The same is with life. Work, enjoy work, and
dedicate yourself to it. Don’t do it for the fame, or the fortune, or
anything besides your own happiness. Because when you do so, you are
self-sufficient, and you’ll be the happiest person.

