Title: ToA Constructor
Date: 2007-11-22 01:38
Author: justinnhli
Slug: toa-constructor

Now that I know what my natural language processing project is, I should
also say what the professor had mentioned in passing but which we won't
be working on. I had nicknamed it the ToA Constructor, or Taxonomy of
Argument Constructor.

It works like this. Say you are debating an issue, for example "The US
government should adopt universal health care." As a suggested policy of
sorts, there are many arguments for and against that statement. The ToA
Constructor is a tool which will help you search for different arguments
which attack the motion from different directions.

Looking at arguments more globally, we can say that policies can be
generally separated into two parts: the means and the end. The (implied)
end in this case is to ensure the health of citizens, and the means is
for the government to pay for health care through taxes or other means.
Each of these two areas could be further dissected to reveal different
types of supports and rebuttals.

Take the means for example. We could attack the proposal for universal
health care to say that it won't actually lead to better health, or that
it is too expensive, or that it won't pass congress. All these are
against the proposal, but in different ways. The first one is saying
that the means does not lead to the end, the second is saying that the
end does not justify the means, and the third is saying that the
circumstances will not allow the means to take place.

A similar deconstruction could be used for the end, to say that the
benefits are too low, or that it does not help the entire nation
equally. I'm sure if I take the time to examine many different motions,
I will find a lot more points of attack. Notice that these points do not
only apply to universal health care, but actually highlight how
arguments are constructed in general, and where attacks against that
argument could attach themselves.

Finally, under each of these different areas of attack, there will be
examples, analogies, parallels from other countries, etc. that will
support that attack. My original vision of the ToA constructor is just
to apply these points of attack to the specific topic, but after that it
could be extended to look at examples as well.

I did some research before I found out I won't be working on this. I was
surprised that this kind of taxonomy does not already exist. I didn't
find a single document which talks about how arguments are constructed,
and which tries to exhaustively list ways of attacking the structure of
the argument. I feel like this would be a great help to any type of
debate, whether at collegiate level or in actual politics. Maybe some of
you readers can point me to a good book on this topic?

