Title: Truth Value
Date: 2009-02-27 06:00
Author: justinnhli
Slug: truth-value

I used to lie a lot. For most of my elementary school education I was at
an British international school. After 6th grade, however, my dad
transferred me to a local Hong Kong school. While the school was still
mostly taught in English, I was simply unused to the style of education
and the amount of tedious work. My bad Chinese, which was the reason I
transferred (to patch up) in the first place, was a particular burden.
Looking back, I can heardly believe what I did back then: pretending to
have headaches, on-purposely turning in the wrong notebook, finishing
only half the homework before turning it in.

Luckily, after two and half years of what is easily the worst years of
my life, I transferred to an American international school, which is
ultimately why I'm in the US now. While I don't do the same tricks
anymore, I still retain the "training" I got from that period. I am
still a very smooth liar. I can maintain the complex web of information
flow most of the time, making sure I don't tell the wrong person the
wrong thing. Sometimes, I still lie before I have thought the situation
through.

Since entering high school my memories of those deliquent years have
faded a lot. I never keep contact with my friends from that school, and
memories of the physical location and the times I spent there are
generic. Becoming more and more a scientist and philosopher, I've often
held knowing the truth above all else. A few recent events, though, have
made me ponder the value of truth. Specifically, under what
circumstances is it okay for one to lie?

Consider these situations:

-   Someone very close to you is in the hospital. You just learned from
    the doctor that they have some terminal illness. Would you tell them
    that they are dying, or would you lie and say everything will be
    okay?
-   You have had a crush on someone for a long time. You spend a lot of
    time with them, but they don't find you romantically attractive. Do
    you risk rejection and tell them your feelings, or do you hide it or
    worse, lie saying you don't feel the way you do (anymore)?
-   Someone close to you is in what you think is a cult. There is no
    danger from being in the cult, and they are very comfortable in this
    organization. You have just found evidence that their beliefs are
    entirely wrong. Do you tell them and watch their world collapse, or
    do you let them live happily in ignorance?

It's hard to say what truth is being weighed against in the first case.
There is no obvious benefit from telling or not telling the truth. In
the second case, truth is being weighed against your personal happiness;
in the third case, against your friend's personal happiness.

If I was the "other person" in all three cases, I would unhesitantly
prefer to know the truth than be left in the dark. To me personally I
see no good coming out of ignorance. Happiness can be found again, and
only in knowing what is actually out there can you make the correct
decision.

Being the person holding the truth, though, makes things a little
different. In the first and third case, I would still tell the truth. I
can see this as selfishness - when only other people's happiness is
involved I tell the truth. For the second case, I do not fear the
rejection so much as losing what I already have. People tend to pay more
to prevent loss than to gain the same amount.

Perhaps it might be more prudent to ask first whether they would like to
hear the truth. In the first case it wouldn't matter - it is clear what
the lie would be about, and that is tantamount to telling the truth. In
the second and third case though, asking first is a possible strategy.
"I have something to tell you. You may not like it, but I would like to
offer you the truth. If you don't want to hear it, I won't tell you, but
I wanted to let you know that I didn't deliberately hide it from you."

Admittedly, I don't do that all the time. It takes a lot of integrity
and courage to do so, more than what I have. More often than not, I will
withhold the truth, and not let them be aware I even know something.
Instead, I will do something to let them discover the truth themselves,
or work to have their mind made up first, before revealing anything.

But isn't withholding the truth still lying?

