Title: VOIP
Date: 2007-10-03 18:43
Author: justinnhli
Slug: voip

As many of you know (how many of you are there anyway?), I don't like
cell phones. It's mostly because I don't like to be interrupted so
often, and just let anyone find me. Plus, I already have a ton of stuff
in my pockets (Moleskine, pen, keys, coins, bills), and I don't want to
cram them even more. Some people have said that by doing so I
inconvenient people, which is sort of true. Some people have also
proposed to give me a phone for my birthday. Er, thanks.

You see, it's not that I don't think phones are useful, I just don't
like them.

But my solution is actually not too bad of one. At Northwestern each
dorm room gets their own phone line, but while we can receive calls, we
have to pay to call out. Works okay if people really want to find me,
but email is still easier, as I can check that anywhere on a computer
and I don't have an answering machine. In fact, despite living within 15
minutes walking distance from all of campus, I like to check my email
whereever I am first before going back to my dorm. So people can find me
(of sorts) if they want to, but that does not help me find other people,
especially for people who don't check their email very often.

The solution: [Click2Voice.com](http://click2voice.com/)

Click2Voice is a free VOIP page. It's not software that you install, but
you use their service through their page, which influences the real
world. You enter your phone number, and the number you're going to call,
and hit enter. In 5 seconds, your phone will ring, as though someone is
calling you. You pick up, and you will hear a prerecorded message
thanking you for using their service and to hit 1 to connect your call.
You do so, and in another 10 seconds your calls goes through, *just as
though you had dialed that number*.

The beauty of this website is that it doesn't require your phone to be
able to call out, which is perfect for my dorm line. So now I can find
people, people can find me with less difficulty, and I don't have to put
extra crap (yes I did just call cell phones "crap) in my pockets.

Perfect.

Eventually though, I'm thinking I'll get a good headset for my computer,
sign up for Skype Out, and do everything through my laptop instead.
Look, ma, no phones at all!

