Title: Week of 2007-12-03 (and 2007-11-26)
Date: 2007-12-10 01:42
Author: justinnhli
Slug: week-of-2007-12-03-and-2007-11-26

I had a dream last night. I dreamt that I was reinstalling the OSes on
my laptop, and for some reason when I installed Linux all my Windows
stuff got imported. So instead of my nice clean wall paper I have twenty
<span style="font-style:italic;">huge</span> icons on my desktop. And
also somehow the default web browser is IE, with all the imported
bookmarks and everything. I remember muttering to myself, "wine," before
going and unmounting my NTFS partition.

And then I woke up. I suppose for some people that would constitute a
nightmare, but to me it just shows how much of a geek I am.

So this week was reading week, which means it's classes as usual. I just
realized I didn't post a "Week of..." post last week, so this will
include that as well.

-   Although I still had most of my classes, I did get down with
    cognitive psychology. The exam was not hard; I barely studied (read:
    didn't) at all, and still did reasonably well (does 89% seem
    "reasonable" enough to all of you who are muttering about my low
    standards?)
-   I'm also done with my stats project, where we analyzed the
    statistics of CTEC (Course and Teacher Evaluation... Crap). Students
    has their interest in a subject most stimulated when the professor
    is good. Go figure. It's surprising that these two areas have the
    highest correlation though; we were originally thinking there might
    be a correlation between time spent and the over all rating of the
    course. But nope; instead, there seems to be an amount of time
    (roughly 3-8 hours per week) where most of low ratings reside. I
    think it's because you either don't work at all and enjoy the
    course, or you are willing to put work in because you enjoy the
    subject.
-   I reinstalled Picasa with the 2.7 Beta Linux version. I had the 2.7
    Windows version running on wine before, but it didn't handle the
    "download album" link on web albums correctly. Now it does, and I
    think it was easier to install than the old version too.

That's about it, actually. Other projects and classes are going well.
We'll see how finals week goes...

