Title: Week of 2007-11-12
Date: 2007-11-19 00:26
Author: justinnhli
Slug: week-of-2007-11-12

Pretty good week.

-   Decided on a project for stats: we're going to mine CTECs and do
    inference on students' rating of professors. I do wonder what we'll
    find...
-   Also got my topic for my natural language processing project: trying
    to differentiate between different points of view. For example, a
    single event (say, SCO suing Novell, IBM and Red Hat) might elicit
    different responses from people in computer science and people in
    law, finance, and political history. The job of this program is to
    find documents describing a different point of view given a single
    event (or document describing the event).
-   Watched a pretty good documentary, NOVA's "Judgment Day: Intelligent
    Design on Trial". The video is online on PBS's site, if anyone want
    to check it out. It's about the Dover trial on teaching intelligent
    design in public schools.
-   Watched the final part of a catapult competition, where people have
    to catapult ten ping pong balls into ten cups from eight feet away.
    The professors' catapult was the best, getting 40%, but of course
    they didn't win anything.
-   Visited the Shedd again, this time got to see some of the behind the
    scenes stuff. I also didn't realize they had several [Gentoo
    penguins](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gentoo_Linux) the last time I
    was there. Working as an animal trainer must be a pretty nice job,
    similar to being a college professor: you won't get into it unless
    you are really into that topic.
-   Condensed my locomotion code. Only a few things feel as good as
    cutting the number of files in half, and making the code more
    robust.

That's it for now.

