Title: National Blog Posting Month
Date: 2013-11-01 23:40
Slug: national-blog-posting-month

Because I’m trying to propose my thesis topic and have so much time on
my hands, I’m trying out National Blog Posting Month (NaBloPoMo). For
people who don’t know, this is a blog version of [National Novel Writing
Month](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/National_Novel_Writing_Month)
(NaNoWriMo), where people write a 50,000 word novel in the month of
November, regardless of quality. The goal for blogging is more relaxed:
30 blog posts in 30 days, one per day, of any length.

My goal is more meager still: I only intend to write 15 blog posts,
published on the odd days of the month. I already have the topics
planned out, in some semblance of order. Most of the topics are things
that I’ve been thinking about for a while now, and have therefore
amassed some notes for; others are fillers, fun things I’ve encountered
in the last year or so.

I’ve [written about
writing](http://justinnhli.com/posts/2009/09/writing-about-writing.html)
before, and how it’s an outlet for me to sharpen my ideas. In the years
since, I’ve also come to realize that I keep a blog in particular
because I often want to share things I have learned. I’m surprised that
I needed a friend to tell me this, that it wasn’t more obvious before.
Part of the reason is probably that I consistently underestimate my
social needs, and simply fail to realize that I’m deriving joy from
other people reading my writing. I feel the larger part of the answer
though (here I go underestimating again) is that most of my enjoyment
comes directly from figuring out my ideas. I like it when I find an
expansion for people's behavior that fits into my worldview, or when I
develop my own viewpoint on some issue; these can then be used to
understand other people. The desire to tell people is a result of my
excitement at figuring something out.

There *is* something I want to get out of sharing though: criticism.
During a meeting, my adviser once said, “what I want is for people to
argue with me.” The same is true here; some of the things I write will
be objectionable, if not ignorant and downright wrong. I want these
things pointed out, so that I will know better, or at least have a
better understanding of why other people disagree with me. So, I humbly
(fine, not that humbly) ask you to call me out, debate with me, and show
me that I’m stupid.

