Title: Restriction-free Relationships
Date: 2013-11-09 18:00
Slug: restriction-free-relationships

I want to explore a curious trend in interpersonal relationships. For
the purposes of this post, I will restrict myself to four types
([stages](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Interpersonal_relationship#Development))
of relationships: strangers, acquaintances, friends, and significant
others. Not all relationships have all four stages, and a lot of
subtleties are left out, but it illustrates a point that applies to the
missing pieces as well.

What does it mean for two people to be acquaintances instead of
strangers? The status of a relationship is, of course, [a
Color](http://justinnhli.com/posts/2013/11/invisible-colors.html):
there's nothing in the physical composition of two people which
classifies them as acquaintances. This particular Color is determined by
whether the two people have been introduced before or otherwise know
each other. Behaviorally, however, there are observable differences:
acquaintances will say hi if they pass each other in the hallway; they
might make ask about each other's family, and so on. Importantly, these
are behaviors that would be considered weird for strangers perform, and
it would be bordering on inappropriate to ask about a stranger's family.
We might say, then, that acquaintances have (implicitly) given each
other *permission* to perform these actions.

More generally, there are four types of attributes I want to examine in
social relationships: permissions, freedoms, obligations, and
restrictions. Permissions, as demonstrated above, are behaviors that it
is now acceptable to do (say, as an acquaintance). *Freedoms* are, in
some sense, the opposite: it is something you were doing before, but is
now acceptable to *not* do; an example might be the need to avoid
meeting someone's gaze. On the other hand, *obligations* are things that
you are now *required* to do (for example, a nod of the head to an
acquaintance), while *restrictions* are things that you are not required
to not do (for example, yell at an acquaintance for no reason). These
describe changes in how two people relate to each other, as they
progress through the stages, from strangers to acquaintances to friends
to significant others. The exact behaviors differ from relationship to
relationship, but these examples seem to be relatively universal, and in
either case, the general idea survives.

As you might have noticed from the description, these concepts are
symmetric:

<table>
<tr>
<th>
</th>
<th>
may

</th>
<th>
must

</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<th>
do

</th>
<td>
permissions

</td>
<td>
obligations

</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<th>
not-do

</th>
<td>
freedoms

</td>
<td>
restrictions

</td>
</tr>
</table>
That is, permissions are about what a person *may do*, freedoms are
about what a person *may not-do*, and so on. There is a duality between
the do's and the don't's, since one can always be framed as the inverse
of the other. To take an example from above, the freedom from having to
avert your gaze can also be framed as the permission to match someone's
gaze. This relates to the [philosophical idea of
action](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Action_%28philosophy%29), but since
that's outside the scope of what I want to talk about here, I will keep
all four terms for clarity.

Given this scale, how do the four stages of interpersonal relationships
differ? Examples of behavior for acquaintances have already been given,
so I will move on to behavior for friends. As friends, the permissions
granted are increased: friends are allowed to insult each other, which
acquaintances may misinterpret or take offense by. That in itself is
also a freedom, from worry about easily offending someone. The
obligations of friendship are harder to define; some people would say
that you are obligated to provide emotional support, although I feel
this is more elective than a requirement, especially for friendships
among men. I can think of no additional restrictions on friends beyond
those of between acquaintances either.

If we review the trends at this point, it would seem that the
permissions and freedoms grow as a relationship deepens, while the
obligations and restrictions remain minimal; even the ones that do exist
are mostly the ones expected of polite human beings in general, not ones
that apply specifically between friends. We might expect that this trend
continue to hold when friends become significant others; we would also
be wrong.

When people begin dating, the permissions (eg. sexual contact) and
freedoms (eg. needing to present a particular image) continue to
increase, but somehow, a host of obligations and restrictions also come
into play. The most prominent of these may be the restriction of sexual
fidelity, or otherwise known as "not cheating". (I must again emphasize
that these behaviors are not universal, although it seems to be accurate
for the majority.) This restriction is particularly notable, because its
scope is not between the two people in the relationship, but between
them and everyone else. Translated into the friendship context, it would
be the equivalent of requiring your friends not to be friends with
someone else; while these kinds of people do exist, they are usually not
the kind of people we want to be friends with in the first place. There
are obligations too; there is a definite expectation to provide
emotional (as well as financial) support, as well as the expectation
that the relationship will be somewhat long-term, especially for
marriages.

That romantic relationships have obligations and restrictions that
friendships don't is not a bad thing a priori. Evolutionary psychology
suggests that the difference in biology between men and women has led to
[sexual
jealousy](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sexual_jealousy_in_humans), and
obligations and restrictions may be a way of making people feel secure,
that was eventually got adopted into the societal narrative of
relationships. Since obligations and restrictions are often desired by
both parties in a relationship, man people can in accordance with them
voluntarily, without questioning whether they want these obligations or
not. Given how ingrained these expectations are in society, I suspect
that most people are not even aware that alternatives exist.

Well known or not, the are models where the obligations and restrictions
are more lax. The most common is the family of practices which do not
require sexual fidelity, such as polyamory and open relationships.
Although less restrictive than mono-amory, they are not necessarily
restriction free; elements of exclusivity remain, as there are often
stipulations about whether and when one partner can have sex with
someone outside the relationships, as well as limits on the amount of
emotional investment allowed. Friend-with-benefit and
no-strings-attached type relationships have similar restrictions on
emotional investment.

Alternatives to other aspects of normal relationships are harder to
find. I don't know if a word exists for romantic relationships where
partners do not provide emotional support, even though this is almost
the default among friendships. The lack of expectation for the
relationship to last seems to be equally rare, although again common
between friends. At least, I have not heard of people celebrating any
anniversaries of friendships (outside of the friendship forming over a
particular event), while the time frame for celebrations for couples
seem to shrink by the ~~year~~ month. These celebrations do not directly
suggest that the partners want the relationship to last, but it does
suggest that many future celebrations are expected.

(EDIT: The above two paragraphs are not being fair to polyamorous
relationships; many in the community also question using length as a
metric for relationships. See the comments for details.)

If we remove obligations and restrictions, what is left are
relationships based on permissions and freedoms - the permission to
cuddle and have sex, the permission to have long conversations about any
topic, the permission to access your thoughts and feelings; the freedom
from all the other pressures that society normally exerts on you, the
freedom to truly *be yourself*, the freedom to do whatever you want.

I'm not sure whether such relationships are possible, and if they are,
whether there is a reason to prefer them over traditional relationships
with obligations and restrictions. From the single conversation I've had
on this topic, it's unclear to me whether the need to impose these
obligations on others can be deliberately reduced; if they can't, that
restriction-free relationships (or, if you prefer to be positive,
permission-based relationships) remain a thought experiment. Regardless
of whether it can be made into reality, I must admit that such a
relationship holds a lot of appeal to me, as I would not be bound by
anyone, and others would be similarly not bound to me. Such a conception
of relationships would also bring it in line with acquaintanceships and
friendships, while blurring the line between all three. I myself have
never been clear on the boundaries anyway, but that would be the topic
of another post.

