Title: Two Ambigrams
Date: 2013-11-21 14:26
Slug: two-ambigrams

Earlier this year I
[tweeted](https://twitter.com/justinnhli/status/351846210367266816) that
I was excited about something that I couldn't reveal at the time. The
*something* is actually an
[ambigram](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ambigram), which I design on
occasion. I first learned of the idea from Dan Brown's [Angels and
Demons](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/960.Angels_Demons), in which
ambigrams played a major role. Incidentally, the [ambigrams in that
book](http://www.johnlangdon.net/angelsanddemons.php) were designed by
[John Langdon](http://www.johnlangdon.net/), who commented on [my
previous
post](http://justinnhli.com/posts/2008/01/ambigrams-and-psychology.html)
about ambigrams and psychology. I designed my first ambigram back in
2004, and have done several more since, mostly as gifts to people.

My best work up till the beginning of the year was a birthday gift I
made for my friend Emily.

![Ambigram of "emily"]({filename}../files/two-ambigrams/emily.png)

One interesting thing about this design is that there is no *i*. The *m*
flows directly into the *l*; the *i* is an illusion created by the
[tittle](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tittle) above the last stroke of
the *m*. I actually made a version with the *i*, but it isn't as
elegant, and I stuck with this version.

The ambigram I made earlier this year was a going-away gift for my
friend Laura, who moved to join her boyfriend Neale in Philly. Neale had
moved there about a year ago, but I failed to make a gift for him then.
The idea was therefore to make a gift for each of them. Having a
[complexity
addiction](http://tvtropes.org/pmwiki/pmwiki.php/Main/ComplexityAddiction),
however, made me wonder whether I can make the two gifts interact
somehow, to represent their relationship.

Long story short, here's the result:

![Rotational chain ambigram of "laura" and "neale"]({filename}../files/two-ambigrams/full-circle.png)

It's actually very difficult to see what's going on; it's better to show
each one separately:

!["laura" part of rotational chain ambigram]({filename}../files/two-ambigrams/laura-circle.png)

!["neale" part of rotational chain ambigram]({filename}../files/two-ambigrams/neale-circle.png)

Individually, each half-circle isn't anything special: it's just their
names in some [fancy
typeface](http://www.google.com/fonts/specimen/Ruthie). Together,
however, is where the magic happens. The more observant of you will have
noticed that the letters in *laura* and *neale* are not independent. In
fact, they share all but the middle letter: the *ra* in *laura* turns
into the *ne* in *neale*, and the *le* in *neale* forms the *la* in
*laura*. Here is the combined circle again, with some highlighting:
*laura* in red, *neale* in blue, and the overlap in purple.

![Rotational chain ambigram of "laura" and "neale", colored to show overlap]({filename}../files/two-ambigrams/colored-circle.png)

The *r*/*n* were easy to merge; the crux of the design was in the
*a*/*e*. It had to look good enough as both for each name to be
readable; this was mostly done by adjusting the length of the closing
stroke and of the
[swash](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Swash_%28typography%29). *neale*
presented an extra challenge: if the *e*'s can be read as *a*'s, then
what should happen to the remaining *a*? I was lucky in that *a* has
[two variants](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/A#Typographic_variants).
Having used the single-story variant for the merged glyph, in the end I
created the double-story variant from scratch, making a Frankenstein
glyph from various bits of different letters.

The final part of this is the presentation. As you saw, the combined
circle is hard read, which meant that each half-circle would have to be
independent. I hit on the solution of printing each on a transparency,
then put in a cardboard frame for sturdiness. This way, each card would
individually show a single name:

![The two half-circles printed on transparencies]({filename}../files/two-ambigrams/separate.jpg)

But when stacked and aligned, it shows the full ambigram:

![The two half-circles printed on transparencies, stacked to reveal complete circle]({filename}../files/two-ambigrams/together.jpg)

Typographically, I still like my *emily* card more, but in terms of the
final product, this surpasses the former by far (which I had simply
printed on cardboard). This is not just because you can fiddle around
with the cards until they align, but because the re-interpretation of
the letters is so unconscious. None of the few people I tested the
ambigram on realized that the *a* changed to an *e* (or vice versa)
until I pointed it out to them, despite them moving the cards into
position and reading back out the individual names. This goes to show
how powerful our preconceptions are in interpreting what we see.

I do not have any future ambigrams planned, although I do have a
different art project in mind. Maybe I will share that when I'm done.
